Textbook of
Physics
Grade
10
Based on National Curriculum 2022-23
www.taleem360.com
National Book Foundation
as
Federal Textbook Board
Islamabad
Government Approval
Approved by the National Curriculum Council (NCC), Ministry of Federal Education and Professional Training, Islamabad
vide letter No. F.No.1-3/2024/NBF/Physics, Dated: November 29, 2024
© 2023 National Book Foundation (NBF) as Federal Textbook Board
All rights to this publication are strictly reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form or by any means-electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise-without the prior express
written consent of the publisher. Unauthorized use, duplication, or distribution is strictly prohibited and may result in legal action.
A Textbook of Physics for Grade 10
Based on National Curriculum of Pakistan (NCP) 2022-23
Authors
Aamir Ullah Khan (Managing Author)
Ahmad Jan, Naeem Nazeer, Nazir Ahmed Malik, Hafiz Mehar Elahi, Muhammad Imran Khaliq (Co-Authors)
www.taleem360.com
Supervision of Curriculum and Review Process
Dr. Shafquat Ali Janjua
Joint Educational Advisor, National Curriculum Council (NCC)
Ministry of Federal Education and Professional Training, Government of Pakistan, Islamabad
NCC Review Committee Members
Mr. Sajid Raza Syed (Assistant Professor, Pak Turk Maarif International, H-8/1, Islamabad)
Mrs. Urooj-Ad-doon (Lecturer, Physics, APSAC, FWO, G7/40 Lines, Rawalpindi)
Mr. Muhammad Awais (Instructor, Physics, BahriaCS&C, G-9/3, Islamabad)
Desk Officer
Mrs. Zehra Khushal, (Assistant Educational Advisor) National Curriculum Council (NCC)
NBF Textbooks Development Supervision
Murad Ali Mohmand
Managing Director, National Book Foundation (NBF)
In-Charge, NBF Textbooks Development
Mazhar Ahmad, Assistant Director
Printed in Pakistan
First Edition: First Impression: February 2025 | Pages: 362 | Quantity: 100050
Price: 470/- Code: STS-722, ISBN: 978-969-37-1724-2
Printer: Neelam Printers, Lahore
TEST
EDITION
For details on additional publications from the National Book Foundation, please visit our website at www.nbf.org.pk
You can also reach us by phone at 051 9261125 or via email at books@nbf.org.pk
For feedback or corrections, kindly send your comments to 'nbftextbooks@gmail.com' and 'textbooks@snc.gov.pk'
Note
All illustrations, artwork, and images in this book are intended solely for educational
and promotional purposes, benefiting the public interest.
PREFACE
This Grade 10 Physics textbook, developed by the National Book Foundation (NBF) in
alignment with the National Curriculum of Pakistan 2022-2023, aims to deepen students'
understanding of physics by building on concepts learned in earlier grades. Our goal is to
foster logical thinking and higher-order reasoning by presenting physics concepts in a way
that connects them to real-world applications, enabling students to relate their knowledge to
daily life and prepare them for more advanced studies.
With contributions from dedicated experts and experienced authors, this textbook has
undergone extensive review and refinement by professional educators. We focused on
making the material engaging and accessible for students by introducing interactive
concepts and real-life activities.
www.taleem360.com
The National Book Foundation remains committed to enhancing the quality of its
educational materials, and this edition features an improved design, clear illustrations, and
meaningful activities that capture students' curiosity. We welcome suggestions from
students, teachers, and the community to further enrich future editions of this textbook.
May Allah guide and help us (Ameen).
Murad Ali Mohmand
Managing Director
3
Practical applications for physics grade 10
Physics is more than a school subject; it's a gateway to understanding the mechanics of the world
around us, from the minuscule particles within an atom to the vast networks of galaxies. As you
dive into this Grade 10 textbook, you'll see that physics isn't just about memorizing equations or
facts-it's about building a mindset for discovery and innovation. This subject provides the tools
you need to solve real-world problems, and the skills developed here will open doors to fields as
varied as engineering, medicine, and technology.
Every concept you'll study has a direct impact on everyday life and future career opportunities.
Whether it's understanding the forces that hold buildings steady or the mechanics of electric
circuits, each chapter will prepare you for roles that are essential in fields shaping Pakistan's
future.
www.taleem360.com
Chapter 10: HEAT CAPACITY AND MODES OF HEAT TRANSFER
This chapter delves into the science of how heat is stored and transferred. Understanding
concepts like thermal conduction, convection, and radiation is essential in fields such as energy
efficiency, HVAC (heating, ventilation, and air conditioning) design, and renewable energy.
Careers in environmental engineering, energy conservation, and climate science rely heavily on
the principles discussed here.
Chapter 11: THERMAL EXPANSION AND CHANGE OF STATE
In this chapter, you'll explore the kinetic theory of matter, thermal expansion, and latent heat,
which are fundamental in materials science, engineering, and environmental studies. Concepts
like thermal expansion of solids and liquids are particularly useful in civil and mechanical
engineering, where they are used to design buildings, bridges, and machinery that withstand
temperature changes.
Chapter 12: WAVES
Studying wave theory, reflection, refraction, and diffraction lays the foundation for work in
telecommunications, sound engineering, and medical imaging. Professionals in fields like
broadcasting, audio engineering, and seismology rely on a solid understanding of wave behavior to
analyze sound waves, light waves, and seismic activity.
Chapter 13: SOUND
In this chapter, you'll learn about the production and propagation of sound, pitch, loudness, and
applications of ultrasonic waves. This knowledge is essential in areas like acoustical engineering,
medical ultrasonography, and environmental science. Careers in audio technology, noise pollution
control, and even entertainment are built upon these principles.
Chapter 14: OPTICS
Here, you will study laws of reflection and refraction, lenses, and applications like gravitational
and acoustic lensing. These topics are fundamental in fields such as optical engineering, vision
sciences, and photography. Professionals in fields like ophthalmology, camera design, and fiber
optics use these principles to create and refine imaging technologies.
4
www.taleem360.com
Chapter 15: ELECTROSTATICS
Understanding electrostatics, electric fields, and electrical discharges is crucial for careers in
electronics, telecommunications, and safety engineering. Applications of electrostatics are found
in devices like photocopiers, air purifiers, and touch screens, opening paths to jobs in electronics
design, environmental control systems, and industrial safety.
Chapter 16: CURRENT ELECTRICITY
This chapter covers current flow, potential difference, Ohm's law, and resistance-the backbone
of electrical and electronic engineering. Knowledge in current electricity is vital for careers in
power distribution, electrical engineering, and electronics. Whether working with power grids,
household appliances, or complex electronic circuits, these concepts are widely applied.
Chapter 17: ELECTRIC CIRCUITS
In this chapter, you'll study the components and design of electric circuits, including resistors,
potential dividers, and power applications. This knowledge is essential for careers in circuit
design, computer engineering, and electrical safety. In Pakistan, the demand for skilled circuit
designers and power engineers is growing in areas like renewable energy systems, automation,
and telecommunications.
Chapter 18: ELECTRONICS
This chapter introduces students to the world of diodes, transistors, and Boolean logic, the
building blocks of modern electronics. Careers in electronics, telecommunications, and even
quantum computing are within reach for students who master the concepts of analogue and digital
electronics.
Chapter 19: ELECTROMAGNETISM
This chapter explores magnetic fields, electromagnetic induction, and the operation of
generators and motors. Understanding electromagnetism is crucial for careers in power
generation, robotics, and transportation engineering. Applications in electric vehicles, magnetic
storage devices, and energy systems make this field rich in opportunities for engineers and
technicians alike.
Chapter 20: ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES
The study of electromagnetic waves, spectrum applications, and light scattering is essential in
fields like satellite communications, radiology, and space exploration. With Pakistan advancing in
areas such as remote sensing and medical imaging, this chapter lays a solid foundation for careers
in telecommunications, medical technology, and atmospheric sciences.
Chapter 21: NUCLEAR PHYSICS
The study of atoms, isotopes, and nuclear reactions offers a gateway to careers in energy
production, medical imaging, and scientific research. By understanding radioactivity, students
can contribute to fields like nuclear energy, healthcare, and space exploration, where the
manipulation and safe handling of nuclear materials are essential.
In conclusion, the journey through Grade 10 physics prepares students not only for higher
academic pursuits but also for impactful careers in diverse fields. Whether you're interested in
energy solutions, medical technologies, or cutting-edge electronics, physics equips you with the
tools to shape the future
5
www.taleem360.com
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
اللہ کے نام سے جو بڑ ے مہربان،نہایت رحم والے ہیں
Contents
Unit 10: HEAT CAPACITY AND MODES OF HEAT TRANSFER
10.1 Specific Heat Capacity
10.2 Transfer of Heat Transfer of Heat
10.3 Applications of Heat Transfer
10.4 Green House Effect and Global Warming
10.5 Flow of Heat in Geothermal Activities
Summary
Exercise
www.taleem360.com
Unit 11: THERMAL EXPANSION AND CHANGE OF STATE
11.1 Kinetic Theory of Matter
11.2 Thermal Expansion
11.3 Evaporation
11.4 Latent Heat
11.5 Pressure Exerted by Gas Particles
11.6 Superconductivity
Summary
Exercise
Unit 12: WAVES
12.1 Wave Motion
12.2 Wave Propagation
12.3 Characteristic Wave Parameters
12.4 Waves and their Types
12.5 Types of Waves On the Basis of Medium
12.6 Types of Waves On the Basis of Propagation
12.7 Wave Characteristics
12.8 Properties of Waves
12.9 Tsunamis
Summary
Exercise
6
www.taleem360.com
Unit 13: SOUND
13.1 Source of Sound
13.2 Nature of Sound Waves
13.3 Ultrasound
13.4 Infrasound
13.5 Characteristics of Sound Waves
13.6 Analysing Sound Waves
13.7 Speed of Sound
13.8 Noise
13.9 Reflection, Refraction and Diffraction of Sound Waves
13.10 Echo
13.11 Acoustics
13.12 Human Hearing System
Summary
Exercise
www.taleem360.com
Unit 14: OPTICS
14.1 Reflection of Light
14.2 Refraction of Light
14.3 Total Internal Reflection
14.4 Thin Lenses
14.5 Application of Lenses
14.6 Visible Spectrum
14.7 Human Eye and Colour Perception
14.8 Gravitational Lensing
14.9 Acoustic Lenses
Summary
Exercise
Unit 15: ELECTROSTATICS
15.1 Static Charge
15.2 Conductors and Insulators
15.3 Charging and Discharging
15.4 Electroscope
15.5 Electric Field
7
www.taleem360.com
15.6 Applications of Electrostatics
15.7 Electrical Breakdown
Summary
Exercise
Unit 16: CURRENT ELECTRICITY
16.1 Electric Current
16.2 Alternating and Direct Current
16.3 Potential Difference
16.4 Emf
16.5 Ohm's Law
16.6 Resistance
16.7 Resistivity
16.8 Electrical Measuring Instruments
16.9 Experiment for Demonstration of Resistance
Summary
Exercise
www.taleem360.com
Unit 17: ELECTRIC CIRCUITS
17.1 Circuit Elements and Diagram
17.2 Resistors
17.3 Types of Resistors
17.4 Combination of Resistors
17.5 Combination of EMF Sources
17.6 Electricity and its Uses
17.7 Electrical Energy
17.8 Electric Power
17.9 Household Circuits and Electric Safety
Summary
Exercise
Unit 18: ELECTRONICS
18.1 Semiconductors
18.2 N and P Type Semiconductors
18.3 PN Junction
8
www.taleem360.com
18.4 Characteristics of Diode Under Biasing
18.5 Light Emitting Diode
18.6 Transistor
18.7 Relays and Switching Circuits
18.8 Transistor as a Switch
18.9 Digital Electronics
18.10 Fundamental Logic Gates
18.11 Universal Logic Gates
18.12 Uses of Logic Gates
18.13 Analogue and Digital Electronics
18.14 Quantum Computers
Summary
Exercise
www.taleem360.com
Unit 19: ELECTROMAGNETISM
19.1 Magnetic Field Due to Current Carrying Wire
19.2 Magnetic Field Due to Current Carrying Solenoid
19.3 Earth's Magnetic Field
19.4 Application of Magnetic Effect of Current
19.5 Force On a Current Carrying Conductor Place in a Magnetic Field
19.6 Current Carrying Coil in a Magnetic Field
19.7 Electric Motor
19.8 Electromagnetic Induction
19.9 Lenz's Law
19.10 Electric Generator
19.11 Transformer
19.12 Deflection of Electron Beam
19.13 Cathode Ray Oscilloscope
Summary
Exercise
Unit 20: ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES
20.1 Electromagnetic Spectrum
20.2 Applications of electromagnetic waves
20.3 Risks associated with electromagnetic waves
9
www.taleem360.com
20.4 Scattering of Light
20.5 Nature of Light
Summary
Exercise
Unit 21: NUCLEAR PHYSICS
21.1 Discovery of Nucleus
21.2 Nuclear Representations
21.3 Isotopes and Radioisotopes
21.4 Radioactivity
21.5 Nuclear Decay
21.6 Half-Life
21.7 Ionizing Nuclear Radiations
21.8 Applications of Radiation
21.9 Background Radiation
21.10 Nuclear Fission
21.11 Nuclear Fusion
21.12 Dark Matter
21.13 Falsibility
Summary
Exercise
www.taleem360.com
GLOSSARY
INDEX
BIBLIOGRAPHY
AUTHORS PROFILE
10
Unit
10
HEAT CAPACITY AND MODES
OF HEAT TRANSFER
Why does a person
enjoy comparatively
cooler weather near sea
at day compared to
land areas?
www.taleem360.com
STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES
The students will:
✓ [SLO: P-10-C-01] Define and calculate specific heat.
✓ [SLO: P-10-C-02] Suggest experiments to measure the specific heat capacity.
✓ [SLO: P-10-C-03] Analyse everyday effects due to the large specific heat of water.
✓ [SLO: P-10-C-30] Justify experiments to distinguish between good and bad thermal conductors.
✓ [SLO: P-10-C-31] Explain thermal conduction in all solids.
✓ [SLO: P-10-C-32] Explain convection in liquids and gases.
✓ [SLO: P-10-C-33] Explain convection in seawater to support marine life.
✓ [SLO: P-10-C-34] Describe the role of land breezes and sea breezes in maintaining moderate coastal
climates.
✓ [SLO: P-10-C-35] Explain how birds are able to fly for hours without flapping their wings and gliders are able
to rise by riding on thermal currents.
✓ [SLO: P-10-C-36] Describe the process of thermal energy transfer by radiation.
✓ [SLO: P-10-C-37] Describe the effect of surface color and texture on the emission, absorption and reflection
of infrared radiation.
✓ [SLO: P-10-C-38] Justify qualitatively how the rate of emission of radiation depends on the surface
temperature and surface area of an object.
✓ [SLO: P-10-C-39] Justify experiments to distinguish between good and bad emitters and absorbers of
infrared radiation.
✓ [SLO: P-10-C-40] Analyze the consequence of heat radiation in the greenhouse effect and its effect in global
warming.
Unit 10
HEAT CAPACITY AND MODES OF HEAT TRANSFER
✓ [SLO: P-10-C-41] Analyze everyday applications of conduction, convection and radiation.
✓ [SLO: P-10-F-23] Use ideas of convection to explain how cyclones are formed.
✓ [SLO: P-10-F-24] Explain how global warming contributes to extreme weather events.
✓ [SLO: P-10-F-25] Explain the phenomena of geothermal activity on the basis of conduction, convection and
radiation.
Have you ever wondered why water takes time to boil or why metal feels colder than wood at the
same temperature? These questions lead us to explore heat, specifically specific heat capacity
and heat transfer methods.
We will start with specific heat capacity, which is the heat needed to raise a substance's
temperature. Water, with its high specific heat capacity, heats slowly but retains warmth longer,
linking kitchen mysteries to broader climate issues. We will conduct experiments to measure the
specific heat capacities of various materials. Next, we will look at the three main heat transfer
methods: conduction, convection, and radiation. These principles explain why hot coffee cools,
why upper floors feel warmer, and how the sun's energy reaches us. Understanding these concepts
is crucial for grasping their roles in greenhouse effects and global warming. Finally, we'll explore
geothermal phenomena, where the Earth's hot core drives magma movements and tectonic
shifts, leading to earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. Throughout this chapter, consider how heat
and its movement impact your daily life and the world around you.
www.taleem360.com
10.1 SPECIFIC HEAT CAPACITY
Specific heat capacity or specific heat of a material is the amount of heat absorbed or lost to
change the temperature of 1 kg of its substance by 1 kelvin or 1 degree celsius.
Q
c=
10.1
MAT
Where 'c' is the specific heat of the material, 'Q' is the amount of heat absorbed or lost, 'm' is the
mass of the substance and 'AT', i.e. (T final - Tinitial) is the change in temperature of the substance.
Its SI unit is joule per kilogram per kelvin (J kg¹ K´¹). Its other units in use are J kg¹ °C´¹ and Jg¹ °C¹.
For example, specific heat of aluminum is 900 J kg¹ K´¹. Its value in other units can be written as
900 J kg¹ °C¹ and 0.9 Jg¹ °C¹.
Some materials require small amount of heat like metals (for example aluminium, copper, iron
and diamond etc). These materials have low value of specific heat. Such materials are good
conductor of heat. We can say that these materials cannot retain heat for longer time with them.
These materials heat up and cool down quickly. Therefore, such materials are used in heat sinks.
Some substances require large amount of heat like water to raise its temperature by one kelvin.
They have large specific heat. These materials absorb or loose large amount of heat for small
change in their temperature. They cannot be easily heated up or cooled down. It means that
these materials can retain heat in them. These materials are used for controlling the temperature
National Book Foundation
12
HEAT CAPACITY AND MODES OF HEAT TRANSFER
UNIT 10
UNIT
Why does a person comparatively cooler weather near sea at day compared
to land areas?
OPENER?
The cooler daytime temperatures experienced in coastal areas, compared to inland
regions, result from the interplay between the high specific heat capacity of water and
the moderating effects of sea breezes. Coastal areas tend to be cooler during the day
than areas further inland due to the differing heat capacities of water and land.
Water's higher specific heat capacity means it takes more energy to raise its
temperature compared to land. Therefore, the water temperature
rises much more gradually. This results in cooler air temperatures near
coastal areas, influenced by the slower-warming water bodies.
The temperature difference between land and sea creates a pressure
gradient that drives sea breezes. As the land absorbs solar radiation
and heats up, the air above it warms, becomes less dense, and rises,
forming a low-pressure zone. In contrast, the cooler sea surface
maintains a cooler, denser air mass above it, establishing a high-pressure area. This pressure difference
www.taleem360.com
propels the cooler air from the sea towards the land, generating a sea breeze. This influx of cooler, more
humid air from the ocean moderates coastal temperatures, keeping them lower than inland areas.
in different devices. For example, water has large
specific heat therefore it is used in cars as engine coolant.
10.1.1 USES OF LARGE SPECIFIC HEAT OF WATER
Water has large specific heat (4200 J kg¹ K´¹). Due to it, it
has significant uses in our daily life.
A. Temperature Variation in Land and Coastal Areas:
The specific heat of dry soil (800 J kg¹ K´¹) is smaller than
that of water. It is about five times smaller than that of
water. It is why land area quickly heats up in summer and
temperature rises from about 45 °C to 50 °C, and also
because land quickly cools down in winter, leading to low
temperatures from 5 °C to 0 °C. But in coastal areas,
temperature variation is small. In Karachi, average
temperature variation is from 19 °C to 32 °C. So, oceans
and large lakes absorb a lot of heat from the sun during
the summer and keep the heat stored in them. On the
other hand, in winters, oceans and lakes release heat into
the atmosphere. This phenomenon keeps the
temperature moderates between summer and winter in
coastal areas.
Table 10.1: SPECIFIC HEATS OF
SELECTED SUBSTANCES
Materials
Specific heat J/kg K
Aluminum
910
Copper
387
Glass
840
Gold
129
Iron/ steel
452
Lead
128
Silver
235
Ethanol
2450
Glycerin
2410
Mercury
139
Water
4190
Carbon dioxide
638
Oxygen
651
Steam (100 °C)
1520
13
National Book Foundation
UNIT 10
HEAT CAPACITY AND MODES OF HEAT TRANSFER
B. Maintaining stability of Ocean and Lake Temperatures: Lakes and oceans heat up and cool
down slowly due to high specific heat of water. This prevents changes in the temperature of the
lake and oceans and thus provides a suitable environment for aquatic life.
C. Human Body Temperature Regulation:
The human body contains approximately
60% water. A healthy body maintains its
temperature about 37 °C. Now, we can
relate how can our body maintain its
temperature due to high specific heat of
water.
Water pump
Thermostat
Upper radiator hose
Radiator core
Bleed hose
D. Cooling system and Heat Exchangers:
Water is used as coolant in power plants,
different industrial process and cooling
system of automobiles (radiators) as shown FIGURE 10.1 Cooling system of vehicles
in figure 10.1. Water takes large amount of excess heat from the machines and effectively
transfer heat using heat exchanger. It prevents overheating in the machinery and maintain their
high efficiency.
Coolant
expansion
tank
Radiator fan
Lower radiator hose
Air flow
www.taleem360.com
E. Cooking Process: Water is good for cooking because of its high specific heat. It heats up slowly
and distributes heat evenly. It ensures food cooking without burning. Hot drinks like tea and
coffee stay hot for long time. Can you explain it?
Example 10.1
A 200 g sample of a solid metal is heated from 25 °C to 75 °C. If 3,500 joules of heat energy is
required to raise the temperature of the metal, what is the specific heat of the metal?
GIVEN:
Mass 'm' = 200 g = 0.2 kg
Change in temperature 'AT' = 75 °C - 25 °C = 50 °C = 50 K
(Change in temperature in celsius and kelvin scales is same)
Heat energy 'Q' = 3,500 J
SOLUTION:
Specific heat capacity is given by: c =
REQUIRED:
Specific heat of metal 'c' = ?
Q
mAT
putting values c=
3,500 J
(0.2kg)(50K)
Therefore
3,500 J
(0.2kg)(50K)
ANSWER
Therefore, the specific heat of the metal is 350 J kg´¹ K´¹.
National Book Foundation
14
HEAT CAPACITY AND MODES OF HEAT TRANSFER
UNIT 10
Example 10.2
A half kilogram sample of aluminum (specific heat capacity c= 900 J kg¹ K´¹) is heated from
room temperature of 25 °C to 100 °C. How much heat is absorbed by the aluminum to raise
its temperature?
GIVEN:
Mass 'm' = 0.5 kg, Specific heat 'c' = 900 J kg¹ K¹
Initial temperature 'T. = 25 °C
final
Final temperature 'T
= 100 °C
Change in temperature 'AT' = 100 °C - 25 °C = 75 °C = 75 K
SOLUTION:
Specific heat capacity is given by:
REQUIRED:
Heat absorbed 'Q' = ?
Q
mCAT
or Q = mCAT
putting values Q = (0.5 kg) × (900 Jkg´¹ K´¹) x (75 K)
Therefore
Q = 33,750 J = 33.75 kJ
ANSWER
The amount heat required by sample of aluminum is 33.75 kJ.
www.taleem360.com
10.1.2 MEASUREMENT OF SPECIFIC HEAT OF SOLIDS AND LIQUIDS
There are different experiments which can be used to determine specific heat of solids and
liquids. The most common methods are "method of mixtures" and "electrical heating method".
A. Method of mixtures: The experiments for measurement of unknown specific heat capacity of
solids and liquids by method of mixtures are discussed below:
1. Measurement of unknown specific heat capacity of solids: This method uses a calorimeter to
determine the heat capacity of a substance. In this method, when the hot sample e.g. a solid is
added to water in the calorimeter, heat is exchanged between them as well as the calorimeter.
From the law of conservation of energy, the heat lost by hot bodies will be equal to the heat
gained by cold bodies. Then we form the equation after measuring the change in temperature of
the water in calorimeter and masses of substances. After careful analysis, we can calculate the
specific heat capacity of the sample.
Apparatus: A Bunsen burner or hot plate, copper calorimeter with lid stirrer and insulating cover,
a metallic solid cylinder (e.g. brass or copper cylinders), weighing machine, water, beaker,
laboratory stand and two thermometers
Key Variables:
Independent Variable is the temperature of the metal block.
Dependent Variable is the energy supplied to the metal block by heating.
15
National Book Foundation
UNIT 10
HEAT CAPACITY AND MODES OF HEAT TRANSFER
Thermometer T₁ °C
Stand
T₂°C
Thermometer
T₂°C
Suspended
Cylinder
Boiling
water
Insulating
Box
Stirrer
Water
Beaker
burner
(a) Initial temperature of
water in calorimeter
FIGURE 10.2 Measurement of specific heat capacity of a solid with mixture method.
(b) Temperature of boiling
water and solid cylinder
(c) Final temperature of
the mixture in calorimeter
www.taleem360.com
Procedure:
1. Take an empty calorimeter of known heat capacity C, Mass of calorimeter m, with
the stirrer and lid.
2. Fill the calorimeter with enough water to completely submerge the solid later. Weigh (m) the
calorimeter with water. Difference of masses (m - m) is equal to the mass of water (m) in the
calorimeter.
3. Place the calorimeter in its insulating cover and insert thermometer in it. Measure the
temperature of water T₁ °C (equal to the temperature of the surroundings) as shown in figure 10.2
(a).
4. Measure the mass of the given solid using a weighing machine and note down its mass as m₂.
5. Boil water in a beaker with the solid submerged. Measure the boiling water temperature
(T₂ °C). In this step, ensure that the solid attains the same temperature as the boiling water on
heating as shown in figure 10.2 (b).
6. Remove the solid from boiling water, shake off excess water, and quickly place it in the
calorimeter. Cover the calorimeter immediately.
7. Stir the water continuously with the stirrer for uniform distribution of heat (and temperature).
8. Measure the final temperature of the mixture once it becomes constant on attaining
equilibrium, record this temperature as T₂ °C as shown in figure 10.2 (c).
9. Now we calculate the increase in temperature of water and calorimeter that is equal to
(T₂-T₁) and decrease in temperature of solid is equal to (T₂-T₁).
10. From principle of calorimetry i.e. law of conservation of energy, heat given by solid in cooling
from T₂ to T₁ is equal to heat gained by the water and calorimeter in raising their temperature
National Book Foundation
16
HEAT CAPACITY AND MODES OF HEAT TRANSFER
UNIT 10
from T₁ to T₂, Such that:
Heat loss by solid = Heat gained by water in calorimeter + Heat gained by calorimeter
Qs = Qw + Qc
or
mc (T₂-T₂) = mcw(T₂-T₁) + mc(T₂-T₁)
By rearranging the above equation, we can find the specific heat capacity of solid.
mcw(T₂-T₁) + mccc(T₂-T₁)
C =
mc(T₂-T₂)
(mcw+mcc)(T₂-T₁)
Hence,
C =
10.2
mc(T₂-T₂)
Result: Equation 10.2 is used to find specific heat of a solid (c.). By putting the measured masses
of solid, water and calorimeter, specific heat capacities of water and calorimeter, and
temperatures T₁, T₂ and T₂ in equation 10.2, we can calculate the specific heat capacity of the
solid.
www.taleem360.com
ii. Measurement of unknown specific heat capacity of a liquid: To measure the unknown
specific heat capacity of a liquid, we follow the same procedure. But in this experiment, we take
solid of known specific heat capacity but liquid of unknown specific heat capacity c, is taken. Same
experiment is performed to measure the unknown specific heat capacity of a liquid. fro this
experiment, law of conservation of energy can be written as:
mc₁ (T₂-T₁) = mc₂ (T₂-T₁) + mc₃ (T₂-T₁)
By rearranging the above equation, we get:
mc₂ (T₂-T₁) + mc₃ (T₂-T₁)
Hence,
C =
10.3
m₁(T₂-T₁)
Example 10.3
A 150 g piece of an unknown solid cylinder is heated to 100 °C and then placed into a
calorimeter containing 200 g of water at 25 °C. The calorimeter has a mass of 50 g and a
specific heat capacity of 0.9 J/g°C. The final temperature of the system (solid, water, and
calorimeter) is 30 °C. Assume no heat is lost to the surroundings. Calculate the specific heat
capacity of the solid.
GIVEN:
Mass of solid cylinder 'm' = 150 g
Mass of water in calorimeter 'm' = 200 g
Mass of calorimeter 'm' = 50 g
Initial temperature 'T₁' = 25 °C
REQUIRED:
Specific heat capacity 'c' = ? (in J/g °C)
Temperature of solid cylinder 'T₁' = 100 °C
Final temperature 'T' = 30 °C
Specific heat of water 'c' = 4.18 J/g °C
Specific heat of calorimeter 'c' = 0.9 J/g °C
17
National Book Foundation
UNIT 10
HEAT CAPACITY AND MODES OF HEAT TRANSFER
SOLUTION:
From principle of calorimetry, we have: c₁ =
(mcw + mcc)(T₂-T₁)
mc(T₂-T₂)
(200 g)(4.18 J/g°C) × (50 g)(0.9 J/g°C) x (30 °C - 25 °C)
putting values c =
(150 g)x(100 °C - 30 °C)
Therefore
c = 0.42 J/g°C
ANSWER
The specific heat capacity of solid is 0.42 J/g°C.
B. Electrical Heating Method: The experiments for measurement of unknown specific heat
capacity of a solid and liquids are discussed below:
www.taleem360.com
i. Measurement of unknown specific heat capacity of solids: In this method, we measure the
amount of heat transferred to a material and measure its temperature change.
Apparatus: A solid block or cylinder e.g. aluminium with a hole in it for a heater and a smaller
hole for a thermometer, an immersion heater, voltmeter, ammeter, thermometer.
Procedure:
1. Calculate the mass of the solid block.
2. Place an electrical immersion heater into the central
hole at the top of the weighed metal block. Connect the
heater with an ammeter to measure current and with a
voltmeter to measure voltage (potential difference)
applied on the heater as shown in figure 10.3.
3. Place the thermometer into the smaller hole. Add few
drops of oil into the hole to make sure the thermometer
is surrounded by hot material.
Immersion Heater
Metal Block
Thermometer
Measurement of specific
FIGURE 10.3 heat capacity of a solid
by electrical method
4. Insulate the block by wrapping it with cotton wool.
5. Record the initial temperature of the block.
6. Connect the heater to the power supply and turn it on for ten minutes. Record the current and
potential difference.
7. After ten minutes, turn the heater off. Record the highest temperature that it reaches
(temperature readings will rise even after the heater is turned off).
8. Calculate the heat energy generated by water.
Result: Calculate the specific heat capacity of the solid block using the formula:
Q
C=
mAT
10.4
National Book Foundation
18
HEAT CAPACITY AND MODES OF HEAT TRANSFER
UNIT 10
ii. Measurement of unknown specific heat capacity of liquids:
Apparatus: An immersion heater, voltmeter, ammeter, thermometer, water and calorimeter.
Procedure:
1. Calculate the mass of empty calorimeter (m₁).
2. Add some liquid e.g. water in calorimeter and measure
the mass of calorimeter plus liquid (m). Difference of the
masses (m - m₁) gives the mass of liquid (m).
Heat generated by heater is calculated by:
Heat energy = electrical energy supplied to
heater
Heat energy = Voltage × current × time
3. Measure the initial temperature of the calorimeter
You will study this formula in detail in
plus liquid using thermometer.
unit 16: Current electricity
4. Place electrical heater inside the liquid, and connect ammeter and voltmeter with it. Switch it
ON. Measure the voltage and current passing through the heater as shown in figure 10.4.
5. Temperature will start to rise. When temperature rises for 10 °C, switch off the heat and stir
the liquid well and measure the highest temperature of the liquid. Then find the temperature
difference between highest temperature and initial temperature of liquid.
www.taleem360.com
6. From law of conservation of energy:
Energy Supplied = Heat gained by liquid
+ Heat gained by calorimeter
QHeater = Qw + Qc
QHeater = m₁c₁ (T₂-T₁) + m₂c₂ (T₂-T₁)
Result: By rearranging the above equation, we get:
QHeater - m₂ c₂ (T₂-T₁)
C₁ =
m₁(T₂-T₁)
10.5
By putting the measured values of heat energy
produced by heater, masses of liquid and calorimeter
and initial and final temperatures, we can measure
the specific heat capacity of liquid.
10.2 TRANSFER OF HEAT
Insulated
container
Liquid
e.g. water
Heating resistor
Measurement of specific
FIGURE 10.4 heat capacity of a liquid
by electrical method
Heat transfer occurs when thermal energy is transferred from one object to another because of a
temperature difference. This process continues until both objects reach the same
temperature, which is known as thermal equilibrium. There are three methods of heat transfer
i.e. conduction, convection and radiation.
19
National Book Foundation
UNIT 10
HEAT CAPACITY AND MODES OF HEAT TRANSFER
10.2.1 THERMAL CONDUCTION
A cooking pot's top edges get extremely hot when we touch them after it has been on the stove for
a while, even if they are not heating hot directly. It happens because heat is transferred to the
top edges due to the phenomenon of conduction. Similarly, when frying vegetables in a pan as
shown in figure 10.5. Heat transfer takes place from the flame to the pan and then to the
vegetables due to conduction.
This method of heat transfer takes place in solids. In
conduction, heat is transferred from atoms to atoms.
Metals are good conductors of heat because they have a
large number of free electrons that travel faster across
the metal when metal is heated. That's why heat energy
is transferred quickly in metals. We can define thermal
conduction as: 'It is method of transfer of heat due to
collisions of atoms or molecules and motion of free
electrons in solids from its hot part to cold part'.
FIGURE 10.5 Thermal Conduction
www.taleem360.com
Copper
Iron
Carbon
Water
Air
Glass
Rubber
Better conductors
Better insulators
FIGURE 10.6 Thermal Conductors
When one of the ends of a rod is heated, atoms at this end start vibrating with larger amplitude.
These atoms hit their neighbouring atoms and transfer heat energy as shown in figure 10.7.
Now, these atoms vibrate with larger amplitude and hit their nearby atoms, and process
continues. Heat energy is transferred between the two ends in this manner.
When a copper rod and a wooden stick are heated simultaneously, we find that the copper rod's
other end heats up more quickly than the wooden stick's other end.
This is due to the fact that
metallic rods, such as copper
rods, have a lot of free
electrons. In comparison to
vibrating atoms, these free
electrons get energy from
the hot end and transfer
energy fast from one end of
the rod to its second end.
Faster vibrating atoms
collide with slower
vibrating atoms
Free electrons
transfer energy
through the metal
Hot
Cold
end
Heat
Atom
Electron
FIGURE 10.7 Mechanism for thermal Conductors
National Book Foundation
20
HEAT CAPACITY AND MODES OF HEAT TRANSFER
UNIT 10
We can say that metals transfer heat energy quickly than other solids like wood, glass etc.
Experiment: Let's discuss an experiment to differentiate between good and bad conductors
(figure 10.8).
Apparatus: Three long thin strips of different metals (for example copper, iron, and aluminium
rods), Vaseline or wax, drawing pins and a Bunsen burner.
Control variables: length of metal rod,
diameter of rods, position in the Bunsen
flame.
Method: The following procedure is adopted.
1. Apply small dots of wax at the ends of
metal rods and fix the drawing pins in them.
Wax
Drawing pin
Iron rod
Copper rod
Aluminium rod
Bunsen burner
Tripod stand
2. Position the other end of the metal rods
into a Bunsen flame. Make sure that heat can
reach every metal rods in the same amount.
FIGURE 10.8 Good and bad conductors
www.taleem360.com
3. As the heat flows through metal rods, wax will melt and pin will drop. Record the time taken for
the wax to melt and the drawing pin to drop off. The fastest time shows the best conductor of
heat. It happens because good conductors allow heat to flow fast through them and cause
Vaseline to melt soon.
Result: The drawing pin falls off the copper rod first followed by the aluminium.
Conclusion: From this we can conclude that copper conducts better than aluminium, while
aluminium conducts better than iron and brass.
10.2.2 CONVECTION
When we heat water on the stove, we can see the movement
of water. Water molecules at the bottom receive heat
immediately. According to KMT, intermolecular forces
between these water molecules decrease as temperature
rises, and the distance between molecules increases. This
makes the water less dense at bottom. This less dense water
FIGURE 10.9
Transfer of heat via
convection
moves from bottom to top after taking heat energy. The dense cold water at the top sinks to fill
the gap and gains heat energy. In this way, the molecules of the water move themselves to
transfer heat energy due to differences in density in two parts of the fluid.
'The method of transfer of heat due to bulk movement of molecules in fluids is called
convection'. We can also define it as "convection is the transfer of heat energy due to the
transfer of fluid itself." Convection only takes place in liquids and gases. It cannot take place in
solids.
21
National Book Foundation
UNIT 10
HEAT CAPACITY AND MODES OF HEAT TRANSFER
Experiments: As illustrated in the figure 10.10, put some potassium
permanganate crystals in the bottom of a beaker filled with water. A
stream of potassium per manganate travels upward and produces a
convectional current when the beaker is heated.
Water at bottom of beaker heats up, it expands and becomes less dense.
This less dense water rises up and transfer heat energy from the bottom
to the top of the container. Then cold water (denser water) flows
downward from the sides and replaces the hot water. This process
continues and heat continuously transfers due to the continuous flow of fluid.
FIGURE 10.10
Formation of
convectional current
You can perform another experiment at home to understand the convection process as shown in
figure 10.11. Take blue and red food colours. Use blue food colour to make blue colour ice cubes.
Now take the water in a transparent bowl or box and put blue ice cubes on one of its sides. Add
warm water on the other side. Place the ink pot filled with red food colour on the warm water side
and the bottom of the container. You will see that red food colour on the warmer side will rise first
and then it will move towards
the cooler blue ice side. And
cold water, being denser,
sinks, and its left place is
filled by the red colour water.
www.taleem360.com
This process continues and
shows the transfer of heat due FIGURE 10.11 Colours showing flow of fluid from hot to cold regions
to the motion of molecules.
A. Convection and Marine Life: Convection is a crucial process that helps support marine life in
the oceans. It involves the movement of seawater driven by differences in temperature and
salinity across the globe as shown in figure 10.12. Salty water is denser than fresh water. In some
areas, seawater becomes saltier and denser, especially where a lot of water evaporates due to
hot weather.
Heat released
to atmosphere
Warm water is less dense than cold water.
When the sun heats the surface of the ocean,
the water at the surface becomes warmer and
less dense. This warm water rises and spreads
out across the surface. Cold water is denser
than warm water.
While in polar regions, the seawater cools
down and becomes denser, causing it to sink
to ocean depths. These movements of water
FIGURE 10.12 Convection currents across the globe
National Book Foundation
22
HEAT CAPACITY AND MODES OF HEAT TRANSFER
UNIT 10
cause convectional
currents. Upward
movement of sea water is
called upwelling and
downward movement of
sea water is called
downwelling as shown in
figure 10.13.
Coastline Wind
Upwelling
Current
Seafloor
(b) Upwelling at sea shores
0°C
(b) Downwelling in polar waters
Distribution of food:
FIGURE 10.13 Upwelling and downwelling
Upwelling typically occurs along coastlines where winds blow parallel to the shore. As surface
water is pushed away from the coast, it is replaced by water rising from below. This deeper water
is usually colder and richer in nutrients (containing nitrogen, phosphate and organic materials) as
compared to the surface water. Phytoplankton (a tiny plant like organism) uses these nutrients an
sunlight to grow and multiply shown in figure 10.14. Phytoplankton is food source for many
marine creatures from small (zooplankton) to large (whales).
www.taleem360.com
Distribution of oxygen: Marine animals,
like fish nee oxygen to live. Most oxygen
is dissolved in top water exposed to air.
Convection causes this water to go deep
into the ocean floor. Without
convection, deep waters would lack
oxygen, making it difficult for marine
life to survive.
Plankton in oceans
Phytoplankton
Zooplankton
Calms and
sponges
Hard coral
Laval and baby fish
Distribution of heat: Due to upwelling
warm water rises up and takes heat to
top. Convection distribute heat
throughout the ocean. This helps to
stabilize the temperature. Also, the
movement of warm and cold water around the globe effects climate patterns, which can affect
the habitats of marine life.
FIGURE 10.14 Plankton in our oceans
INFORMATION
Rubber is generally a better insulator than air. Rubber has a lower thermal
conductivity than air, meaning it can reduce the transfer of heat energy more
effectively. Rubber has tightly bound electrons which helps to resist transfer of
heat. Rubber can resist the flow of heat energy about 4-8 times better than air.
23
National Book Foundation
UNIT 10
HEAT CAPACITY AND MODES OF HEAT TRANSFER
B. Land Breeze and Sea Breeze: Breeze continuously
blows on the coastal areas due to convection. Breeze
during the day is called sea breeze and breeze during the
night is called land breeze.
SEA BREEZE
Warm air from land
Cool air from ocean
Sea Breeze: During the day, land heats up quickly than
the sea due to its low specific heat. Therefore, air above
the land becomes hot, expands and becomes less dense.
This hot air above land rises up and cool air above sea
moves toward the land to fill the gap.
LAND BREEZE
Warm air from ocean
Land Breeze: At night, temperature of land quickly falls
than the water (water can maintain its temperature for
Cool air from land
long time due to its high specific heat capacity). Due to
this, air above the sea is hotter than the air above the
land. Therefore, hot air above the sea water rises up and cool
air from the land moves towards the sea to fill the gap.
FIGURE 10.15 Sea and land breeze
These breezes continuously blow across the coastal areas and help to maintain the moderate
climate there as shown in figure 10.15. These natural wind patterns help to cool coastal areas
during the day and moderate temperatures at night, resulting in a more temperate and stable
climate. Sea breeze carries moisture from the ocean, influencing coastal humidity and
precipitation patterns. This continuous blowing of breezes exchanges gases from land to sea and
sea to land (and prevents the stagnancy of gases in the region).
www.taleem360.com
C. Thermal and Bird's Flight: During the day, Sun heats the land unevenly, dark and concrete
structures absorb more heat than other areas like grass or water. Therefore, air above hot areas
become less dense and rises from the ground. This rising hot air is surrounded by the cooler air
around it, forms an eddy, and birds and gliders use them to soar through the air.
Birds like eagles, hawks, vultures, etc. are
expert thermal riders. These birds have
large and wide wings. By spreading their
wings and tilting them slightly upwards,
they ride on this rising air (thermals) as
shown in figure 10.16. To stay within the
thermal in this rising air, they fly in circles.
They glide between thermals and maintain
their high altitude without flapping their
wings for a long period of time.
Colder air sink
Warm air rises
FIGURE 10.16 Motion of birds on thermals
National Book Foundation
24
HEAT CAPACITY AND MODES OF HEAT TRANSFER
UNIT 10
D. Hurricanes and Cyclones: Hurricanes form over warm ocean waters. The warm water causes
evaporation and this moist air rises due to convection. As it rises, it cools and forms clouds
through condensation. This condensation releases latent heat which warms the surrounding
atmosphere, making the air there lighter. As a result, the air continues to rise, lowering the
atmospheric pressure at its surface. This decrease in pressure increases the rate of evaporation
and causes more warm, moist air from oceans to move up. The Earth's rotation causes this rising
air to spin, forming a cyclonic system. As the system gathers strength, it can develop into a
hurricane with high wind speeds.
10.2.3 THERMAL RADIATIONS
Heat transfer through electromagnetic waves doesn't require any physical contact. For example
the sun heats the Earth through radiation, and you feel warmth from a fireplace even at a
distance (figure 10.17). "The process of transfer of heat in the form of electromagnetic
radiation (infra-red radiation) is called radiation".
www.taleem360.com
Heat transfer through conduction and convection requires a medium, however heat transfer
through radiation does not require a material medium. There is vacuum between the Earth and
the Sun but still heat (infra-red radiation also known as IR radiation) and light reaches the Earth.
(a) Dry lands
(b) Burning woods
(c) Hot iron
FIGURE 10.17 Examples of sources of thermal radiations
Light is the fastest entity in nature. All
forms of electromagnetic radiation (figure
UV Visible light
Infra red
10.18), including heat, move at the speed
47%
Visible
light
of light. Therefore, radiation is the fastest
method for transferring heat. Every object
emits infrared radiation. The amount of heat
2% UV
emits infrared radiation. Every object
Sun emits large amount of radiation
whereas less hot objects like human body
FIGURE 10.18 Solar spectra
emits small amount of radiation.
A. Effect of Different Surfaces: All the objects absorb as well as radiate heat energy in the form
of infrared radiations. The amount of thermal radiation emitted by an object depends on
different factors:
25
National Book Foundation
UNIT 10
HEAT CAPACITY AND MODES OF HEAT TRANSFER
MINI LAB
Materials: Three identical hot water bottles, three different insulating materials
(e.g., bubble wrap, foam sheet, and newspaper etc.), Thermometers, Hot water
Procedure:
1. Fill the three hot water bottles with hot water (around 80 °C to 90 °C).
- Bubble wrap (conduction insulation)
2. Wrap each bottle with a different insulating material: Foam sheet (convection insulation)
- Newspaper (radiation insulation)
3. Measure and record the initial temperature of the water in each bottle using a thermometer.
4. Place the bottles in a room with a consistent temperature (around 20 °C to 25 °C).
5. Measure and record the temperature of the water in each bottle every 15 minutes for an hour.
6. Compare the temperature changes in each bottle to see which insulating material performed best.
www.taleem360.com
Surface colour of the object: Different
coloured surfaces have different absorption
and emission abilities as shown in table 10.2.
Table 10.2: EFFECTS OF RADIATION ON
DIFFERENT SURFACE COLOURS
Colour
Absorbing
Emitting
Reflecting
A good absorber is a good emitter, but it is a
Black
Best
Best
Worst
bad reflector. For example, wearing black
clothes on a sunny day absorbs more heat and
Dull/Dark
Good
Good
Bad
warms us. Black-coloured surfaces are good
White
Bad
Bad
Good
emitters; that's why laptop chargers are
made up of black-coloured surfaces. It helps Shiny silver
Worst
Worst
Best
to cool it quickly. Similarly, the worst absorber is also the worst emitter, but it is a good
reflector. Shiny silver surfaces are good reflectors; that's why car windscreen shades are made
from silver-coloured surfaces.
Texture of the surface: Texture is the quality of something that can be known by touch, or the
degree to which something is rough or smooth or soft or hard. Texture of a surface can be rough,
bumpy, slick, scratchy, smooth, silky, soft, prickly etc. Rough, dull, and dark surfaces are good
absorbers and emitters of radiation, but they are the worst reflectors. While smooth and shiny
surfaces are bad absorbers and emitters of radiation, they are good reflectors. Before painting
the walls of the houses, they are made smooth and usually painted white. So that they could
become good reflectors and less absorbers. It helps
controlling the temperature of the houses.
Surface area of the object: At the same temperature,
a hot body with a big surface area emits more radiation
than a body with a small surface area. Therefore, heat
radiators installed in houses, car radiators etc have FIGURE 10.19 Infra-red heater
large surface area, which helps them to radiate quickly.
National Book Foundation
26
HEAT CAPACITY AND MODES OF HEAT TRANSFER
UNIT 10
MINI LAB
Materials: Two similar cans (one can have shiny silver surface and the other is painted
dull black) with lid, thermometer and radiant heater.
Procedure: Pour an equal amount of water into two cans. Place both cans at the same
distance from an electric heat source. Insert thermometers into the cans as shown in
the figure. There are two experiments that can be conducted with this setup:
1. Turn on the heater and after ten minutes, the water
Equal distance
in the can with the dull black surface will heat up
significantly hotter than the water in the other can.
2. Keep the heater off and pour boiled water into the
Dull black surface
Radiant heater
cans. After ten minutes, the water in the can with the
dull black surface will be much cooler than the water in
Shiny silver surface
the other can.
What can you conclude from these experiments, that which surface is a good absorber and which
surface is a good reflector of heat?
www.taleem360.com
For example, infrared heater (figure 10.19) that primarily emits infrared waves have large
plate area so that it could radiate more heat.
B. Effect of temperature on the rate of radiation: As we know that all objects absorb as well as
radiate heat. Rate of radiation emitted by an object is directly proportional to temperature of
the object. High temperature objects radiate more than low temperature body. Sun has high
temperature and large surface area, it emits large amount of radiation while a cooking stove has
low temperature and small surface area than the Sun, it emits less amount of radiation.
When an object is absorbing more heat than radiating, its temperature will rise. When the object
is emitting more heat than absorbing, its temperature will drop i.e. it will cool down. An
object will remain at same temperature if it is absorbing and radiating heat at equal rate. This
state is called thermal equilibrium. A hot cup of tea is placed on table, initially its temperature is
higher than its surroundings. It will be emitting radiation at faster rate. Its temperature will
decrease. After a while, its temperature will reach the temperature of surroundings (i.e. it will
reach thermal equilibrium).
C. Leslie cube: The Leslie cube is used to demonstrate how different surface textures affect the
emission of thermal radiation. It consists of four sides having different surfaces usually they
are black and white painted surfaces, a matte black or dark coloured surface and shiny metal surface.
It is hollow cube with lid at its top. Hot water is used usually to heat the interior of the cube. An
'infrared (IR) thermometer' as detector is used to measure the amount of IR radiation emitted
from the surface of the cube.
27
National Book Foundation
UNIT 10
HEAT CAPACITY AND MODES OF HEAT TRANSFER
The experiment on the Leslie cube (figure
Leslie cube Shiny silver
10.20) follows the following procedure.
1. Boiling water is added to the Leslie cube Matt
black
for heating it.
Matt
2. Wait until the cube reaches the desirable White
temperature.
Infrared
detector
3. Measure the quantity of radiation
emitted from each surface by placing the IR
www.taleem360.com
thermometer at the same distance from
each one in turn. (The infrared
thermometer detects the infrared FIGURE 10.20 Different surfaces of Leslie cube
radiation emitted by each surface. Higher
radiation translates to a higher temperature reading.)
The surfaces which is better at emitting radiation show a higher temperature reading on the
infrared thermometer, while the surfaces which are bad at emitting radiations have a lower
reading. After performing the experiment, we can have the following conclusions:
• Black surface is the best absorber and emitter but worst reflectors.
• Dark coloured surface is good absorber and emitter but bad reflector.
• White surface is good reflector while bad absorber and emitter.
• Shiny metal (shiny silver) surface is the best reflector while worst absorber and emitter.
10.3 APPLICATIONS OF HEAT TRANSFER
A. Cooking in kitchen pan using conduction, convection and radiation: When you place a
kitchen pan on a stove burner, heat from the burner conducts through the base of the pan as
shown in figure 10.21. The metal of the pan absorbs the heat energy due to direct contact with
the hot surface. Hot metal surface transfers the heat energy to food in contact with it by
conduction. Also, this heat travels to whole surface
of the pot and the handle. This explains why the
Heat
Convection
materials that are poor heat
Conductors, such plastic or wood.
Conduction
When heating water in a pan or pot on the stove,
convection currents occur. As the water near the
bottom of the pan heats up, it becomes less dense
Radiation
Radiation
and rises, while cooler water from the top sinks. This
circulation helps distribute heat evenly and speeds FIGURE 10.21 Heat transfer in kitchen pan
up the boiling process.
National Book Foundation
28
HEAT CAPACITY AND MODES OF HEAT TRANSFER
UNIT 10
Heat from the flame also reaches the pot through radiation process. In outdoor grilling or broiling
in an oven, heat radiates from the hot charcoal or heating element directly onto the surface of
the metal pan through radiation. The pan absorbs the radiant heat, which then transfers to the
food inside the pan. So the kitchen pans can use all heat transfer methods for cooking as shown in
figure 10.22.
B. Heating a room by convection: In winter, gas
heaters are commonly used in Pakistan to keep
rooms warm. When a gas heater is ignited, it
heats the air surrounding it. The heated air
becomes less dense and rises, generating
convection currents. As the hot air rises, cooler
air moves in to take its place near the heater.
This cooler air then gets heated by the heater, FIGURE 10.22 Heating room by convection
Gas
heater
Less dense hot air rises
Cold denser air sinks
www.taleem360.com
rises. The air that has risen eventually cools down becomes denser and sinks back towards the
heater. This continuous cycle of hot air rising and cool air sinking creates a convection current
that helps distribute heat throughout the room, gradually raising the overall temperature.
C. Mechanism of a household hot-water system:
The most common hot water system is the storage
tank water heater as shown in figure 10.23. Cold
water enters your house and splits into hot and cold
lines. The storage tank holds this cold water and
heats it with an electric element or gas burner
controlled by a thermostat. Hot water naturally
rises to the top of the tank. When you turn on a hot
water tap, the hot water from the top flows out. As
hot water is used, cooler water from the bottom
refills the tank and is reheated. This cycle keeps a
steady supply of hot water available.
Heat
exchanger
Burner
Fan
Gas
Cold water
Hot water
FIGURE 10.23 Household Hot-Water System
POINT TO
PONDER
Why are freezer compartment at the top of refrigerator?
The freezer is located at the top of a refrigerator to take advantage
of convection, the cold air from the freezer travels down and cools
the bottom of the refrigerator. The warm air from the bottom rises
and gets cooled again in the freezer.
Also the freezer is placed above the hot compressor, which is usually
located near the bottom of the refrigerator.
29
National Book Foundation
UNIT 10
HEAT CAPACITY AND MODES OF HEAT TRANSFER
D. Maintaining Liquid Temperature: Wrapping an insulator
around a hot object or around a hot/cold liquid containing
object can reduce the flow of heat. This property of insulators
helps to maintain the temperature of liquids. This property of
insulators is used in thermos flasks (also called vacuum flask) as
shown in figure 10.24. Thermos flasks has double walled
construction with vacuum between its inner and outer walls.
With vacuum in the double walls, conduction of heat of the
liquid through the outer wall is not possible. Transfer of heat is
also not possible through the vacuum. Convection requires
movement of air for heat flow, so convection currents cannot
produce. Some heat is lost due to radiation. To minimize heat
loss due to radiation, inner walls of the flasks are silvered. This
reflects a significant portion of the radiant heat back towards
the liquid inside, minimizing heat loss. Some of the heat can
flow out due to conduction from the material of the flask and
from the lid. Therefore, inner of the thermos flasks are now
made up stainless steel which has low conductivity and lids are
made up of plastic which usually trap air for better insulation.
Cap
Lid or stopper
Inner glass wall
Outer glass wall
Hot liquid
Reflective coating
(Silvered surface)
Vacuum
Outer casing
Insulated support
FIGURE 10.24 Thermos flask
www.taleem360.com
E. Reducing Thermal Energy Transfer in Buildings: We can maintain comfort improve energy
efficiency and reducing heating and cooling costs by proper thermal insulation in our homes and
other buildings. Thermal insulation in winters, slows down the heat loss from warm interior to
colder outside environment and it reduces the need of heating systems. In summer, it slows down
the heat gain from the hot outside environment to the cooler interior, keeping the building cooler
and reducing the need for air conditioning. Thermal insulation can be achieved in many ways. To
reduce the conduction and convection, use double wall glazing windows with vacuum or air
between its walls as shown in figure 10.25 (a), use foam etc in the gaps on the walls or doors. False
ceiling which traps the air acts as
Glass
Air space
insulation between the roof and the
ground as shown in figure 10.25 (b),
using thick curtains etc. Proper
Spacer
orientation of the home and shading
Desiccant
during the summer reduce the heat
entering the home. Proper
(a) Doubled glazing window
(b) False cieling
ventilation also help to reduce
temperature inside the home during FIGURE 10.25 Reducing thermal energy transfer
summer.
National Book Foundation
30
HEAT CAPACITY AND MODES OF HEAT TRANSFER
UNIT 10
F. Measuring Temperature with Infrared thermometers: In this chapter, we have studied that
all objects emit heat radiations in the form of infrared radiation. These are not visible but we can
sense them because they carry heat. Heat coming from the Sun, heaters or hot plates etc have
infrared radiations in large amount. It is this heat that the infrared thermometers detect to
measure the temperature of objects.
When it is unsafe or impracticable to make direct physical touch, infrared thermometers are
used. For example, during the Corona Pandemic, infrared thermometers were routinely used.
They are also used to determine the temperatures of highly hot surfaces, such as those found in
furnaces, industries, food storage facilities, and hazardous places, such as those containing
radioactive materials etc. Infrared thermometers can be utilized as:
1. Carefully read the instructions on the device manual.
2. Power on infrared thermometer and adjust its scale (degree Celsius or degree Fahrenheit).
3. Point the thermometer sensor to the target surface.
Hold the thermometer steadily at a suitable distance
mentioned in the manual as shown in figure 10.26.
www.taleem360.com
4. Press and hold the trigger (a button) until the reading
on the display screen stabilizes.
5. Once you hear a beep or see a stable reading on the
display screen, release the trigger and note down the
FIGURE 10.26 Infrared thermometer
temperature.
The following precautions should be maintained while using infrared thermometer.
1. Each infrared thermometer has a distance-to-spot (D:S) ratio. This ratio tells you the diameter
of the target area (whose temperature is to be measured) relative to the distance from the
target. For example, a D:S ratio of 12:1 means that for every 12 units of distance from the object,
the thermometer will measure a spot with a diameter of 1 unit. So, if you hold the thermometer
12 inches away from the surface, it will measure temperature of the circle roughly 1 inch in
diameter.
2. Avoid taking measurement of the small objects, moving objects, wet objects, reflective
surfaces and rough surfaces.
3. Keep comparing its accuracy, off and on, with the mercury thermometer.
10.4 GREEN HOUSE EFFECT AND GLOBAL WARMING
Just like all objects, Earth also absorbs and emits radiations. Earth absorbs theses high energy
radiations and emits low energy radiations back in the atmosphere. But water vapours, carbon
dioxide, methane and other greenhouse gases forming atmosphere absorb these heat radiations
emitted by the Earth and re-emit back to the Earth. Due to this, Earth warms which is necessary
31
National Book Foundation
UNIT 10
HEAT CAPACITY AND MODES OF HEAT TRANSFER
for life to sustain on it. This is called greenhouse effect. If Earth had no atmosphere, it would have
emitted all the absorbed radiations and its temperature would have drop to -180 °C at night
(equal to temperature of Moon at night). At such low temperature, life would not have existed at
the Earth.
Some light that hits the earth is
6% is scattered by atmosphere
reflected back into space, while
the rest becomes heat
20% is reflected by clouds
Greenhouse gases
absorbed and reflect heat
clouds 5% is reflected by
radiated by the Earth
Earth's Surface
20% is absorbed by
preventing it from
atmosphere and clouds
escaping into space.
49% is absorbed by Earth's surface
FIGURE 10.27 Trapping heat by greenhouse gases in the atmosphere
www.taleem360.com
Human activities like burning of fossil fuels (coal, wood, oil and natural gas), large number of
vehicles on roads generating smoke, many industrial and agricultural activities (producing
methane and nitrogen oxide) and deforestations (which reduces the number of trees that can
absorb carbon dioxide) have increased the concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.
Due to this amount of thermal radiation, trapped by the greenhouse gases, have increased. This
has increased the Earth's average temperature. This gradual increase in the temperature of
Earth's atmosphere and oceans is called global warming. This higher temperature is affecting our
ecosystem, weather pattern (e.g.
duration of season is changing) and
human health. Due to global
warming, we are facing extreme
More
evaporation
Global Warming
Drier
flooding, hurricanes, extreme
Dry area
rainfall, droughts etc. Let's discuss
their causes:
A. Flooding: This increased
temperature of the Earth is causing
fast melting of glacier, which is
More rain
Wet area
Global Warming
wetter
increasing the sea levels. Rising sea
levels is a threat to coastal area life
as it is increasing flooding and
erosion of land.
FIGURE 10.28 Droughts and extreme rainfalls
National Book Foundation
32
POINT TO
PONDER
HEAT CAPACITY AND MODES OF HEAT TRANSFER
UNIT 10
Climate models predict that by 2050, global fires could increase by 19% compared to
2015. Why is this happening?
There are three main reasons for increase in global fires:
1. Hotter, Drier Conditions: A key factor is rising temperatures. A warmer climate
means more evaporation, leading to drier soil and vegetation. This creates more
flammable fuel for fires to spread quickly.
2. Longer Fire Seasons: As temperatures rise, the window for hot
and dry weather - prime fire season - gets longer. This extends the
period when wildfires are most likely to ignite and spread.
3. Changes In Precipitation Patterns: Rainfall patterns are also
predicted to shift due to climate change. Some areas may
experience less rain, further exacerbating drought conditions and
increasing fire risk.
www.taleem360.com
B. Hurricanes: Global warming heats up the oceans, giving hurricanes more energy. This makes
them stronger with faster winds and heavier rain. Warm air can hold more moisture, so hurricanes
can drop even more rain.
C. Rainfall: Rising temperature due to global warming have increased evaporation, causing
greater moisture in the atmosphere and resulting in more intense rainfall in the area that already
experience significant rainfall.
D. Droughts: Due to greater evaporation rate, water in soil and plants is decreasing. It is causing
the land to get drier and making it harder for plants to acquire enough water to grow healthily.
E. Wildfires: Increased temperatures due to global warming are drying out more trees,
vegetation, and bushes, increasing the amount of fuel available for fires. If a fire starts due to
lightning or human activity, it can quickly spread over a large area, becoming uncontrollable. This
results in huge amounts of smoke, significantly decreasing air quality.
INFORMATION
The image shows communities at
COMMUNITIES
higher risk to health issues related
OF COLOR
to climate change and Possible
remedies. Dark text shows steps
that can be made to reduce the
dangers that those communities
face, while white text highlights
such risks.
CHILDREN
Adaptation efforts that
consider these communities
can reduce harm.
OLDER ADULTS
Checking on indoor
temperatures and
air quality.
LEAD INCOME
COMMUNITIES
Access to affordable
and healthy housing.
Food and water safety
programs.
Clean public
transportation.
Access to social support
networks.
Stronger community
ties.
Lack of access to
healthcare.
Financial instability.
Pre-existing health
conditions.
Lower life expectancy.
Less access to green
spaces.
Exposure to extreme
heat.
Asthma and other
respiratory illnesses.
Cardiovascular disease.
Comprehensive disaster
management can improve
preparedness.
33
National Book Foundation
UNIT 10
HEAT CAPACITY AND MODES OF HEAT TRANSFER
MINI LAB
Activity: Carbon Footprint of Daily Transportation
Carbon Footprint: A carbon footprint measures greenhouse gas emissions from
activities like fossil fuel burning, deforestation, and industrial processes. It can be
reduced by unplugging devices, using energy-efficient technologies, and adopting
renewable energy sources.
Ecological Footprint: The ecological footprint measures the resources needed to
support a lifestyle, including land, water, and waste absorption. A larger
footprint means higher environmental impact, so reducing it helps
protect the planet.
Activity: We can estimate carbon footprints using simple calculations.
For example, a car emits approximately 0.2 kg of CO₂ per kilometre
travelled. If a student travels 5 km to school every day by car, he can
calculate his daily carbon emissions from transportation as:
Daily CO₂ emission = 5 km × 0.2 kg CO₂/km = 1kg CO₂/day
Then, calculate for a week (assuming 5 days per week of school):
Weekly CO₂ emission = 1 kg/day x 5 days = 5 kg CO₂/week
20%
6.4%
6.4%
27%
20%
18%
17.6%
15%
www.taleem360.com
Class Activity: All students of the class are asked to calculate the carbon footprint of their own daily
transportation and compare results with classmate. Discuss actions to lower your carbon footprint?
Carbon Footprint
F. Winter Storms: Winter storms are events like snow, sleets and freezing rains with strong winds.
Due to increased moisture in atmosphere results in heavier snowfall in winters.
We have to take steps to fight the effects of this global warming. We have to stop deforestation
and increase forestation on the globe which are natural carbon dioxide absorbing source. This can
reduce the about of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. We have to find such energy efficient
sources which releases no or minimum greenhouse gases. Beside this, we have to adapt with this
global warming conditions as well. Make resilient infrastructure which could sustain the extreme
weather events.
INFORMATION
Recent Heat waves and Floods In Pakistan due to Global Warming
Heat-waves May- June 2022: Devastating heatwave gripped Pakistan
and India with temperatures exceeding 51 °C (123.8 °F). Scientists linked
this event to global warming.
Devastating Floods 2022: Severe monsoon rains and rapid glacial melt,
both influenced by climate change, caused disastrous floods in the whole
country, especially provinces Sindh, major areas of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
and Balochistan, and some areas of Punjab.
34
National Book Foundation
UNIT 10
HEAT CAPACITY AND MODES OF HEAT TRANSFER
10.5 FLOW OF HEAT IN GEOTHERMAL ACTIVITIES
The structure of the Earth is divided into three
parts: core, mantle, and crust as shown in figure
10.29. The core is the central part of the earth. It
is the hottest part. Its temperature is about
6000 °C. It is mainly composed of iron and nickel.
The core is so hot due to different factors,
involving left-over heat during the formation of
the earth, radioactive decay of elements like
uranium and thorium inside the core, and extra
pressure applied by the earth's gravity. The inner
core is the portion of the core that is solid. The
core's solid form is maintained by the extreme
pressure. The molten portion of the core is referred
to as the core's pressure has dropped. Temperature of the outer core is about 4000 °C. The mantle lies
between core and crust. It is the thickest part. It floats on the outer core. It is composed of the
silicate minerals mainly containing iron and magnesium. It is solid but shows plasticity
(permanent change in shape of solid material) under high pressure due to gravity. The crust is the
outer part of the earth's structure. It is composed of silicate materials. It is divided into
continental crust and oceanic crust. The lithosphere is the layer between the crust and the upper
mantle. The asthenosphere lies just beneath the lithosphere and plays a critical role in plate
tectonics. Magma is molten or partially molten rock located beneath the Earth's crust. It forms
from the partial melting of the mantle and crust due to various geological processes.
Crest
Lithosphere
(Crust and upper
most mantle)
Asthenosphere
0 to
100 km
Mantle
2900 km
Outer Core
5100 km
Core
Inner
Core
6738 km
Earth
FIGURE 10.29 Earth's structure
www.taleem360.com
10.5.1 FLOW OF MAGMA BENEATH
THE EARTH
There is extremely high temperature
Ridge Push
Oceana Ridge
Slab Pull
Ocean Trench
around 2,000 °C to 6,000 °C between core
to crust. This intense heat within the
Mantle
mantle can cause some solid rock to
Lithospheric mantle
partially melt, forming magma. This
molten material i.e. magma is less dense
than the surrounding solid rock. Heat is
Asthenosphere
transferred from core to mantle through
conduction as there is temperature
Convection Currents
difference between core and mantle. In
FIGURE 10.30 Flow of Magma Beneath the Earth
35
National Book Foundation
UNIT 10
HEAT CAPACITY AND MODES OF HEAT TRANSFER
the mantle, hot magma rises up, becomes less dense and rises up i.e. It transfers heat through
convection. Hot magma heats up and cold magma sinks. This process develops convectional
current as shown in figure 10.30. In this way, magma flows from bottom of mantle towards crust.
Hotter magma flows easily than colder one. When magma flows, it melts the rocks on the way
which may change its composition. When magma cools down, it solidifies and forms rocks deep
underground. If magma finds a path to the surface through vents or fissures, it erupts as lava,
shaping volcanic landscapes.
10.5.2 VOLCANIC ERUPTIONS
Magma rises from the mantle due to convectional currents and pressure difference in mantle and
crust. It is stored in the crust at the place, called magma chamber.
As magma rises, its pressure decrease. This allows
Ash cloud
the dissolved gases such water vapor, carbon
CO₂
dioxide, and other volatiles to release and it
SO₂
H₂O
increases the internal pressure of the magma
Crater
Vent
chamber. When this pressure exceeds the strength
Secondary vent
Lava flow
of the covering rock, magma fractures it and creates
pathways (main and secondary vents) for itself to
Ash
reach the crust. This leads to a forceful volcanic
Conduit
eruption through crater (main opening), driven by
high-pressure gases and magma as shown in figure FIGURE 10.31 Volcanic eruption
10.31. The hot magma that flows out during an
Rocks layers of
earth crust
Magma chamber
eruption is called lava. Volcanic eruption depends
upon factors like magma composition, temperature,
amount of gas and interaction with water etc.
www.taleem360.com
10.5.3 MOVEMENT OF TECTONIC PLATES
Tectonic plates are very large, rigid parts of the Earth's crust and upper most mantle. These plates
float on the molten mantle (semi-fluid asthenosphere). These tectonic plates interact with other
tectonic plates and generate geothermal activities like earthquakes, volcanic eruptions etc.
Movement of Tectonic plate is basically due to the process of magma convection current in
mantle. Convection currents of magma drag the plates along with it and cause horizontal
movement in tectonic plates. Similarly, sinking of dense and cold magma due to convection
applies a pull on the tectonic plates and helps them to move as shown in figure 10.32.
Movement of tectonic plates is very slowly, few centimeters per year. Due to their movement,
tectonic plates can move apart (diverge or spreading), come together (converge), or slide past
each other (transform faulting).
National Book Foundation
36
Continental crest
Volcanic island arc
Deep sea trench
Ocean water
Spreading ocean
ridge
Ocean crest
HEAT CAPACITY AND MODES OF HEAT TRANSFER
UNIT 10
0
Lithosphere
Cold
Frictional Drag
-100
-200
Depth (km)
Hot
Asthenosphere
(Ductile low strength)
-300
Pull
-400
FIGURE 10.32 Movement of tectonic plates caused by the motion of magma
INFORMATION
There are seven major
tectonic plates:
www.taleem360.com
North American
plate
Eurasian Plate
1. Pacific Plate
Pacific Plate
2. North American Plate
African Plate
3. South American Plate
South American
plate
Indo Australian Plate
4. Eurasian Plate
5. African Plate
Antarctic Plate
6. Indo-Australian Plate (It is considered as two separate tectonic plates i.e. Indian plate and Australian plate)
7. Antarctic Plate
Apart from these there are eight minor plates (Arabian plate, Caribbean plate, Indian plate etc.) and many
micro plates (Rivera Plate, Somali Plate etc.) as well.
10.5.4 EARTH'S CORE MAINTAINING ITS TEMPERATURE
Scientists believe that Earth's formation involved accretion, where gravity pulls matter together
to create celestial bodies. After the Sun formed, gravity combined dust, rocks, ice, and gases to
form massive objects like Earth. According to the Giant Impact Hypothesis, a planet named Theia
collided with Earth about 4.4 billion years old, resulting in the destruction of Theia. The partial
melting of Earth and the scattering debris into space. The early atmosphere was mainly hydrogen
and helium, and as the crust solidified, volcanic eruptions and asteroid impacts introduced water,
water vapour, ammonia, and carbon dioxide. Over time, Earth evolved to support life. Today, the
Earth's core remains extremely hot, around 6000 °C. Lets discuss different factors due to which
Earth's core is maintaining its temperature.
A. Residual Heat from Formation: During the formation of the Earth (accretion process), large
37
National Book Foundation
UNIT 10
HEAT CAPACITY AND MODES OF HEAT TRANSFER
number of massive objects, e.g. planetesimals objects, asteroids and other massive objects
collided with it. The kinetic energy from these collisions was converted into heat, large amount
heat energy has been retained in the Earth's core.
B. Radioactive Decay: There are certain radioactive elements present in the Earth's core like
uranium-238 and thorium-232 and potassium-40. During decay of these radioactive elements,
large amount of energy is released in the form of heat. This process is continuously contributing to
the temperature of the core. Due to decay process, amount of these radioactive elements is also
decreasing, that's why rate of heat generation from radioactivity has decreased slightly.
C. Gravitational Compression: During the formation of the Earth, its materials were compressed
under the force of gravity. This increased the pressure and hence, temperature in the core. In this
way, gravitational compression becomes a constant source of heat to the core.
D. Crust as Insulator: The Earth's outer layers act as a thick layer of insulation. This slows down
the rate at which heat escapes from the core into space. So, crust helps maintain the high
temperature of the core for a longer period.
www.taleem360.com
Mechanisms that generate heat are gradually slowing down, allowing heat to escape from the
Earth. However, this process is so slow that the core has managed to maintain its temperature for
the past 4 billion years.
SUMMARY
• Heat Capacity is the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of any amount of
substance by 1 °C or 1 K.
• Specific Heat Capacity is the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of one gram
of substance by 1 °C or 1 K.
• Conduction is the mode of transfer of heat due to direct contact of medium particles, which
do not change their positions. It occurs in solids because of difference in temperatures.
• Convection is the mode of transfer of heat due to the motion of particles. It occurs in liquids
and gases because of the density difference between different regions.
• Radiation is the mode of transfer of heat due to electromagnetic waves. It does not require
material medium for its motion.
• Land Breeze is the breeze that blows from the land. It normally occurs during the night and
early morning.
• Sea breeze is the breeze that blows from the massive water bodies. It normally occurs
during the summer and spring season.
• Greenhouse Effect is the process through which heat is trapped near Earth's surface by
substances known as greenhouse gases.
National Book Foundation
38
HEAT CAPACITY AND MODES OF HEAT TRANSFER
UNIT 10
Global Warming is the long-term heating of Earth's surface observed since the pre-
industrial period (between 1850 and 1900) due to human activities, primarily fossil fuel
burning.
• Cyclones are large revolving tropical storms caused by winds blowing around a central area
of low atmospheric pressure.
• Hurricane is a tropical system with winds that have reached a constant speed of 74 miles
per hour or more.
• Heat Wave is a period of abnormally hot weather generally lasting more than two days and
can occur with or without high humidity.
• Flooding is an overflow of water onto normally dry land.
• Drought is a prolonged dry period (deficiency of precipitation) in the natural climate cycle
that can occur anywhere in the world.
• Accretion is a process in which particles of matter, such as dust and gas, gradually come
together due to gravitational attraction to form large objects, like planets, moons etc.
• Debris refer to the fragments rock, dust and other material that were scatteredd into space
as a result of collision between Theia an Earth.
• Geothermal Activity is a group of natural heat transfer processes, caused by the presence
of excess heat in the subsurface of the affected area, occurring on Earth's surface.
www.taleem360.com
39
National Book Foundation
UNIT 10
EXERCISE
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS
QI. Choose the best possible option in the following questions.
1. Why is water used in radiators of automobile as coolant?
A. It is easily available
B. It is low cost or free
C. It has large specific heat
D. It has oxygen
2. Which of the following situations is the best example of conduction?
A. A metal spoon becomes hot when placed in boiling water
B. Warm air rising near a heater
C. Sunlight warming the surface of the Earth
D. A microwave oven heating food
www.taleem360.com
3. Which combination of heat transfer methods would be dominant when you place your hand
near, but not touching, a fire?
A. Conduction and radiation
B. Convection and conduction
C. Radiation and convection
D. Conduction and insulation
4. What is symbol and what is unit for the heat capacity of an object?
A. J°C-¹
B. J kg¹ K¹
C. J kg¹
D. J kg¹ K
5. If the same amount of heat energy is supplied to equal masses of water and copper, why
does the temperature of copper increase faster?
A. Copper has a lower specific heat capacity B. Water is a poor conductor of heat
C. Convection in water dissipates heat energy quickly
D. Radiation from water is stronger
6. The transfer of heat that takes place because of density difference in fluids is
A. Conduction
B. Radiation
C. Convection
D. Insulation
7. Which of the following statements best explains why the Earth experiences more heat
from the Sun than the Moon, despite being almost the same distance away?
A. Earth is better conductor than the moon
B. The Earth has greenhouse gases
C. The Moon reflects most of the Sun's radiation
D. Moon traps heat effectively
8. Dull black colour on a surface is the best absorber of radiation, which of the followings is
the best radiator?
A. Dull black surface
B. Shining silver surface
C. Red Coloured Surface
D. White surface
National Book Foundation
40
UNIT 10
HEAT CAPACITY AND MODES OF HEAT TRANSFER
9. How does the enhanced greenhouse effect contribute to global warming?
A. It increases the Earth's ability to reflect solar radiation
B. It traps more heat in the Earth's atmosphere, raising global temperatures
C. It blocks ultraviolet rays from entering the atmosphere
D. It increases the Earth's rotation speed, causing heat buildup
10. What is the primary driving force behind the movement of tectonic plates?
A. Gravitational pull of the Moon
B. Solar radiation
C. Mantle convection currents
D. Magnetic field of the Earth
11. Which layer of the Earth is composed of partially molten rock that can flow slowly?
A. Lithosphere
B. Asthenosphere
C. Mesosphere
D. Outer core
www.taleem360.com
12. Which of the following extreme weather events is most directly associated with rising sea
levels?
A. Tornadoes
B. Wildfires
C. Hurricanes
D. Earthquakes
CONSTRUCTED RESPONSE QUESTIONS
QII. Follow the directions to respond to the following questions.
1. This AI-generated image illustrates global warming caused by the greenhouse effect and
its impact on climate change. It shows how rising temperatures due to the greenhouse effect
led to more frequent and intense heatwaves and hurricanes.
It shows how rising temperatures due to the
greenhouse effect led to more frequent and
intense heatwaves and hurricanes. Answer the
following questions, considering the concepts
mentioned above:
a. How do increased temperatures lead to
more frequent heatwaves in cities?
b. How might the intensity of future
heatwaves and hurricanes change if global
temperatures continue to rise?
c. Explain what the glass roof of a
greenhouse and carbon dioxide in Earth's
atmosphere have in common in terms of
heat and temperature.
National Book Foundation
41
UNIT 10
HEAT CAPACITY AND MODES OF HEAT TRANSFER
2. This table shows the temperature of 10 g of water and 10 g of iron after being in direct
sunlight for up to 60 minutes.
Time (minutes)
0
15
30
45
60
Temperature of water (°C)
25
26.2
27.5
28.8
30
Temperature of iron (°C)
25
35
45
55
65
a. Create line graphs of temperature (on the y-axis) and time (on the x-axis) for both water
and iron on a graph sheet. Be sure to label the substances.
b. Based on the data in the table, which heats up quickly: water or metal?
c. Which do you think will cool more slowly: water or iron? Elaborate your answer.
d. When you boil water in an iron pot on the stove, which heats up faster: the iron pot or the
water? Provide a reason for your response.
www.taleem360.com
SHORT RESPONSE QUESTIONS
QIII. Give a short response to the following questions.
1. Why should we wear dark-coloured clothes in winter and white-coloured clothes in
summer?
2. In a house, geysers or water boilers are fitted on the ground floor, and still, we get warm
water on the top floor without using a pump. How is it possible?
3. Where will you get more heat from the wood fire, 1 meter above the woods or 1 meter
from the front of the woods?
4. Why do crowded city areas feel hotter compared to the outskirts on a hot summer day?
State the reasons for this difference.
5. Why is the is the metallic handle of a door colder than the wood of the same door when
touched?
6. How do trees help reduce the effects of climate change, and what could happen if forests
are depleted?
7. How does gravity contribute to the Earth's core temperature?
8. Why do certain gases in the atmosphere trap more heat than others?
9. What are the potential environmental impacts of extraction of geothermal energy?
10. How does the specific heat capacity of different materials affect their use in cookware?
National Book Foundation
42
HEAT CAPACITY AND MODES OF HEAT TRANSFER
UNIT 10
11. Water at 20°C is sent deep underground into heated layers, where it turns into a mix of
steam and hot water at 100°C. As the steam and hot water cool back down to 20°C, why
does 1 kg of steam release more energy than 1 kg of hot water?
LONG RESPONSE QUESTIONS
QIV. Give a detailed response to the following questions.
1. Explain the concept of specific heat capacity in matter. Discuss various applications of water
based on its high specific heat capacity.
2. What is conduction, and how is it explained by the kinetic theory of solids? What makes
metals better conductors than other solid substances.
3. Analyze how heat is transferred through convection. Provide at least three practical
examples of how convection is used in daily life.
www.taleem360.com
4. Analyze the process of heat transfer through radiation, explaining why it is the fastest
method of heat transfer. What factors influence the rate of heat transfer by radiation?
5. Analyze the role of greenhouse gases in global warming. How does global warming
contribute to the increased severity of hurricanes, heat waves, flooding, and droughts?
6. Why Earth's core has extreme high temperature even after 4 billion years? Explain in detail.
7. How are tectonic plates formed, and what factors cause them to move? Explain these causes
in detail and discuss the effects of plate movements.
NUMERICAL RESPONSE QUESTIONS
QV. Solve the questions given below.
1. Convert specific heat of water 4180 J kg´¹ K¹ into units of Jg´¹°C´¹.
(Ans. 4.18 Jg¹°C´¹)
2. Calculate amount of heat given to 25 kg of water to increase its temperature by 50°C.
(Ans. 5.25 MJ)
3. A half kg block of an unknown metal is heated from 30 °C to 80 °C, requiring 19 kJ of heat
energy. (a) Calculate the specific heat capacity of the metal. (b) If the same metal block is
heated from 80 °C to 125 °C, how much additional heat energy would be needed?
(Ans. 760 J kg¹K´¹, 17.1 kJ)
4. Calculate the change in temperature of 5 litre of water if it absorbs 8.4 MJ of heat energy?
(Use Specific heat of water = 4200 J kg¹ K´¹)
(Ans. 400 °C)
43
National Book Foundation
UNIT 10
HEAT CAPACITY AND MODES OF HEAT TRANSFER
5. In a container, 100 g of water at 80 °C is mixed with 200 g of water at 20 °C. What will be the
final temperature of the mixture, assuming no heat loss to the surroundings (and
container)? (Use specific heat capacity of water is 4200 J kg¹ K¹ or 4.2 J g¹ K¹).
(Ans. 40 °C)
6. A 200 g piece of an unknown solid cylinder is heated to 110 °C and then placed into a
calorimeter containing 200 g of water at 20 °C. The calorimeter has a mass of 60 g and
specific heat capacity of 0.9 J/g°C. The final temperature of the system (solid, water, and
calorimeter) is 35 °C. Assume no heat is lost to the surroundings. Calculate the specific
heat capacity of the solid.
(Ans. 890 J kg¹ K¹ or 0.89 Jg¹ K´¹)
7. A hot steel rod is cooled by plunging it into cold water, as shown in Fig. The steel rod has a
mass of 3 kg and is initially at a temperature of 450 °C. It cools to 50 °C when placed in the
water. The specific heat capacity of steel is 460 J kg¹ °C¹. Calculate the thermal energy
(heat) lost by the steel rod as it cools to 50 °C.
steel rod
www.taleem360.com
(Ans. 552 kJ)
National Book Foundation
44
STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES
The students will:
✓ [SLO: P-10-C-04] Use the terms for the changes in state between solids, liquids and gasses.
✓ [SLO: P-10-C-05] Explain thermal expansion in terms of kinetic theory.
✓ [SLO: P-10-C-06] Analyze the applications and consequences of thermal expansion in real life.
✓ [SLO: P-10-C-07] Analyze melting, solidification, boiling and condensation in terms of energy transfer
without a change in temperature.
✓ [SLO: P-10-C-08] State the melting and boiling temperatures for water at standard atmospheric pressure.
✓ [SLO: P-10-C-09] Describe qualitatively the thermal expansion of solids.
✓ [SLO: P-10-C-10] Explain the thermal expansion of liquids.
✓ [SLO: P-10-C-11] Analyse the pressure and the changes in pressure of a gas in terms of particles.
✓ [SLO: P-10-C-12] Differentiate between boiling and evaporation.
✓ [SLO: P-10-C-22] Describe evaporation in terms of particles.
✓ [SLO: P-10-C-23] Analyze how temperature, humidity, surface area and air movement over a surface affect
evaporation.
www.taleem360.com
✓ [SLO: P-10-C-24] Explain how evaporation causes cooling.
✓ [SLO: P-10-C-25] Describe the use of cooling caused by evaporation in the refrigeration process without using
harmful CFCs.
✓ [SLO: P-10-C-26] Explain latent heat.
✓ [SLO: P-10-C-27] Justify experiments to determine latent heat of fusion and latent heat of vaporization of
ice and water.
✓ [SLO: P-10-C-28] State that certain materials, when cooled to near absolute zero, can exhibit
superconductivity.
✓ [SLO: P-10-C-29] Describe superconductivity.
UNIT 11
THERMAL TRANSFORMATIONS
Have you ever wondered why there are gaps in train tracks or why a cold bottle sweats? The
answer lies in the relationship between temperature and matter. This chapter explores how heat
affects particle movement, leading to phenomena like expansion, evaporation, and
superconductivity.
We will begin with the kinetic theory of matter, examining how temperature influences particle
motion and material properties. Then, we will look at thermal expansion, noting how solids and
liquids expand with heat. Next, we will discuss state changes, including condensation,
sublimation, and evaporation, along with latent heat. Finally, we will explore superconductivity,
where certain materials lose no energy at very low temperatures. Let's explore these interesting
thermal properties of matter!
11.1 KINETIC THEORY OF MATTER
www.taleem360.com
In the previous class, we studied matter and its properties with help of kinetic molecular theory
of matter. Let's revise some of their properties. Matter exists in three fundamental states: solid,
liquid, and gas. Matter consists of particles (atoms and molecules). Gaps between these particles
are the main reason that divides the matter into three states as shown in figure 11.1. Particles of
matter apply attractive forces to each other. The difference in strength of this force is the reason
for smaller or larger gaps between particles. The greater the strength of the attractive force
between particles, the smaller the distance between them and vice versa.
Solids: In solids, particles are close to each other, and they
have a high density. There is a strong attractive force
between particles which keeps them closely packed.
Particles in solids can only vibrate about their mean
position. When a solid absorbs heat, the vibrational kinetic
Solid
Liquid
Gas
Cool
Hot
energy and amplitude of the vibration of its particles
increase. These particles push each other away and
increase the gap between them. This is how solids expand
upon heating.
FIGURE 11.1
Effect of temperature on distance
between particles of matter
Liquids: A liquid has intermediate density (smaller than a
solid and higher than a gas). The attractive force between
its particles is stronger than that of gases but weaker than
that of solids. Due to it, the distance between particles in liquids is greater than that in solids.
Liquid particles keep changing their position. Liquid particles flow. When a liquid is heated,
attractive force between particles decreases and particles start moving.
Gases: In gases, there is negligibly weak attractive force between gas particles. Due to weak
attractive force, distance between particles is larger as compared to the size of the particles.
Particles are in constant random motion and they constantly colliding with each other and with
National Book Foundation
46
THERMAL TRANSFORMATIONS
UNIT 11
the walls of the container. Due to collisions of gas particles with container, they exert pressure.
Gases are less dense than liquids and gases. When gases are heated, kinetic energy of gas
molecules increases. They move faster and expand quickly. Figure 11.1 shows the change in
distances between the particles of different states of matter due to change in their temperature.
11.1.1 CHANGING STATES OF MATTER
Figures 11.2 shows the change in state of ice (solid) into
water (liquid) and then into water vapours (gas) with
Gas (vapours)
increase in its temperature. Attractive forces among
particles of matter usually decrease with increase in
temperature.
As we now know that temperature of matter effects the
attractive forces between its particles. Pressure on matter
also effects the phase changes of matter. Particles of liquids
Liquid (water)
and gases come close to each other on increasing the
pressure on them and vice versa.
A. Changes Between Liquids and Solids: Let's discuss
various phenomena involved in phase changes of matter.
Solid (ice)
FIGURE 11.2 Phases of matter
www.taleem360.com
• Freezing: It is the phenomenon in which any liquid changes into solid. When a liquid is placed
at a place where its surroundings have low temperature then it loses heat to its surroundings.
Its particles come close to each other and become solid at temperature called freezing point.
For example, water changes into ice at 0 °C (freezing point of water).
• Melting: It is the phenomenon in which solid changes into liquid. When a solid is placed at a
place where temperature of its surroundings is high then it absorbs heat from its surroundings.
When its temperature reaches melting point, its particles overcome their bonding attractive
forces and start flowing. For example, ice changed in warm surroundings melts at 0 °C. Freezing
point and melting points are same.
B. Changes Between Liquids and Gases:
• Vaporisation: It is the phenomenon in which a liquid is converted into gas (vapours) upon
boiling. When a liquid is heated, its particles gain kinetic energy. On continuous heating, their
kinetic energy becomes sufficiently high that they overcome the attractive forces between
them and escape from the liquid. Vaporisation is shown in figure 11.3 (a) this happens at a
certain temperature of the liquid called its boiling point.
47
National Book Foundation
UNIT 11
THERMAL TRANSFORMATIONS
• Evaporation: It is phenomenon of conversion liquid into vapours at any temperature. We will
discuss it in detail later in the chapter.
• Condensation: It is a phenomenon in which gases (vapours) change into liquids. Condensation
happens in vapours where the temperature and pressure are low. Warm air can hold more
moisture than cool air. When the warm, moist air cools down, the water vapours condense
because the cooler air has a lower capacity to hold water vapour. For example, when you take a
cold water bottle out of the fridge, you often see water droplets forming on the outside as
shown in figure 11.3 (b). This happens because the cold-water bottle cools the air around it,
causing the water vapours in the air to condense onto liquid water on the bottles surface. Its
other examples are formation of dew drops on grass, Foggy car wind screen, foggy bathroom
mirrors etc.
(a) Boiling water changing
into vapours
(b) Condensation of water
vapours on cold bottle
(c) Sublimation of dry
ice
(d) Deposition of frost on
leaves
FIGURE 11.3 Changing states of matter
www.taleem360.com
C. Changes Between Solid and Gases:
• Sublimation: It is a phenomenon in which solids change directly into gases.
• Deposition: It is a phenomenon in which gas changes directly into solid. Deposition is example of
deposition. On a cold night, water vapour in the air becomes so cold that water vapour leaves to
windowpanes that are much cooler than the surrounding air. The water vapor loses heat to
National Book Foundation
48
THERMAL TRANSFORMATIONS
UNIT 11
• The coefficient of volumetric thermal expansion of solids is defined as the fractional change in
volume per kelvin change in temperature. It tells how much volume of the solid object will
change with respect to its original volume when its temperature rises by 1 kelvin. Its value is
different for different materials. SI unit of B is K¹. As we know that solid expands on heating and
National Book Foundation
51
THERMAL TRANSFORMATIONS
UNIT 11
11.3 EVAPORATION
Have you ever thought how wet clothing dry on a clothesline or why puddles disappear on a hot
summer day? This happens by a process known as evaporation. Evaporation is the process by
which liquid changes into vapours (gas) at any temperature. This occurs at the surface of the
liquid.
11.3.1 CAUSE OF EVAPORATION
In a liquid, Molecules in a liquid have different kinetic energies due to
collision with each other and with walls of container. High energy
molecules moving near the surface of the liquid escape from the surface
of the liquid in the form of vapours as shown in figure 11.12. This is how evaporation
takes place.
11.3.2 EVAPORATION CAUSES COOLING
During evaporation, fast moving molecules escape from the surface of
the liquid. The molecules that have lower kinetic energies are left behind.
This lowers the average kinetic energy of the liquid molecules and,
hence, the temperature of the liquid.
FIGURE 11.12
Molecules escaping
from the surface of
liquid in evaporation
www.taleem360.com
The temperature of a substance relates to the average kinetic energy of its molecules. A decrease
in temperature causes a cooling sensation. For example when we sweat the evaporation of
moisture from the skin cools the body. Similarly, when a liquid evaporates from the surface of a
solid, it lowers its temperature. This principle is used in refrigerators and air conditioning
systems.
11.3.3 FACTORS AFFECTING RATE OF EVAPORATION
The rate of evaporation indicates how quickly molecules at the surface of a liquid escape and
become a gas. Higher rate of evaporation means the liquid will evaporate faster. Rate of
evaporation depends upon different factors, such as:
A. Temperature: Rate of evaporation is directly proportional to temperature. Higher
temperature in the liquid increases kinetic energy of its molecules and increase the rate of
evaporation. Water in sunshine (high temperature area) evaporates faster than water in shade
(low temperature area).
B. Surface Area: A larger surface area allows more molecules to escape, speeding up
evaporation. Larger is the surface area of a liquid, greater number of molecules has the chance to
escape from its surface. It is why wet clothes are stretched out to dry quickly.
National Book Foundation
57
UNIT 11
THERMAL TRANSFORMATIONS
C. Humidity: Dry air is less humid air (it has low value
of moisture in it). It has ability to store more
moisture. Therefore, lower humidity levels increase
the rate of evaporation as dry air can allow more
water vapours to be absorbed. You now understand
that room air coolers function most efficiently in the
dry air months of June and less efficiently in the
humid months of August.
Evaporation pad
Fan
Hot air
Evaporation
Cool air
Pump
Reservoir
Schematic diagram of
FIGURE 11.13
room air cooler
D. Wind Speed: Increased wind speed blows away the
moist air near the surface, which speeds up the rate
of evaporation. It is why wet clothes dry quickly in
CAN YOU
TELL?
Why wet clothes dry up
more quickly in summer
than in winter?
www.taleem360.com
windy day than on a calm day.
11.3.4 DIFFERENCE BETWEEN EVAPORATION
AND BOILING
Both boiling and evaporation represent the change of
liquid into vapours. But there are some differences in
both processes, as shown in table 11.4.
Table 11.4: DIFFERENCE BETWEEN EVAPORATION AND BOILING
Properties
Evaporation
Boiling
Occurs
at the surface of liquid
Throughout the liquid
Temperature
at any temperature
only at boiling point of liquid
Energy Source
Uses surrounding energy
uses continuous external heat source
Rate/speed
Generally slower and depends on
many factors
Fast process (after reaching boiling
point)
Process Completion
Time
It takes longer to be completed
It is quick process than evaporation
Effect of pressure
Less effected by external pressure
Highly effected by external pressure
Formation of Bubble
No bubble formation
Bubbles are formed throughout the
liquid and rise from the surface
Dependence on
surface area
Depends on surface area
Does not depend on surface area
Effect on temperature Causes cooling in surrounding
of surrounding
Increases temperature of surrounding
National Book Foundation
58
THERMAL TRANSFORMATIONS
UNIT 11
11.3.5 APPLICATIONS OF EVAPORATION
A: Refrigeration using evaporation (without CFCs): Cooling
is produced in the fridge/refrigerators by evaporation of
refrigerant (a liquefied gas), which absorbs heat and creates a
cooling effect.
DO YOU KNOW?
The density and viscosity of a
liquid determine how quickly it
evaporates. Liquids that are less
viscous and dense, such as those
found in perfume bottles,
evaporate more quickly.
Freons, or chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), were the type of
refrigerant gas used in fridge. However, since it was found
that CFCs are depleting the ozone in the upper atmosphere
which increases the amount of UV rays from
Low pressure
High pressure
the sun. All living things are harmed by
Cool liquid
Hot liquid
ultraviolet radiation. Therefore, CFCs use
has been prohibited. CFCs are replaced by
the environment friendly substances like
Cool air
water, ammonia and hydrocarbons (propane,
Compressor
The refrigerator contains a coil (called
evaporation coil) filled with refrigerant at
Low pressure. When
Evaporator
Expansion valve
The warm air inside the fridge comes into
contact with the evaporator coil, the FIGURE 11.14 Refrigeration cycle
refrigerant absorbs heat and changes from liquid to gas, which cools the inside of the fridge. This
www.taleem360.com
gas is then compressed, releasing heat outside, and is condensed
back into a liquid by the condenser. This cycle continues to
maintain a cool temperature inside the fridge.
B. Food preservation: Many food items are preserved by removing
the water content through evaporation. This concentrates the
flavours and prevents spoilage. Examples include dried fruits,
jerky (dried meat), as shown in figure 11.5 (a).
(a) Fruits dried using evaporation
C. Production of salt: Sea water is stored in large pools. As the
water evaporates, the salt is left behind as shown in figure 11.5
(b).
(b) Sea salt obtained from
evaporation of sea water
D. Air conditioning: Air conditioners use evaporation to cool air.
They work by passing warm air over a coil that is filled with a cool
liquid. As the liquid evaporates, it takes heat from the air, cooling FIGURE 11.15
Uses of evaporation
it down.
59
National Book Foundation
UNIT 11
THERMAL TRANSFORMATIONS
E. Fever control: When someone has a high fever, they apply a wet cloth to their forehead. The
reason behind this is that heat from the head is removed when the water evaporates. As a result,
the patient's brain temperature stays within acceptable bounds and no brain injury occurs.
11.4 LATENT HEAT
Consider you are boiling a pot of water. The temperature of the water increases gradually as you
turn up the heat. But then, something interesting happens. The water reaches 100 °C. Even when
you apply more heat, the temperature does not change! Where is all that energy going?
The answer lies in a concept called latent heat. It is the hidden heat absorbed or released by a
substance during a phase change (like melting, freezing (solidification), boiling or condensation)
without a change in temperature. It is defined as 'It is the amount of heat energy absorbed or
lost by a substance during its phase change without change in its temperature'.
www.taleem360.com
To understand this concept, look at this graph shown in figure 11.16 between temperature and
heat energy which is added uniformly to the ice at -20 °C to 110 °C (after its boiling points). This
graph has five portions.
From A to B: Heat is given to ice at -20°C. Its temperature rises and but it is still ice at 0 °C.
From B to C: Now heat given to ice is not increasing its temperature. This heat is being used to
change its states from ice (solid) to water (liquid) at its melting point 0 °C. This amount of heat is
called latent heat of fusion (L). This process continues till all the ice is converted into water.
From C to D: In this portion, added heat again increases the temperature of the water uniformly
till it reaches its boiling point.
Temperature (T)
Latent heat
120
of vaporization
Water
Vapours
Stand
Thermometer
100
80
beaker
60
40
Ice + water
at 0 oC
Water
20 Latent heat
B of fusion
C
Heat (Q)
burner
Ice
Melting
Boiling
FIGURE 11.16 Phase change of ice to vapours
National Book Foundation
60
THERMAL TRANSFORMATIONS
UNIT 11
From D to E: In this portion, added heat again is not used to increase the temperature of water. It
is used to change the state of water (liquid) into vapours (gas) at its boiling point 100 °C. Heat
added at this stage to water is called latent heat of vaporization (L).
From E to F: After complete change of water into vapours at its melting point, added heat
increases the temperature of the vapours (steam).
Temperature of a substance is related with the average kinetic energy of the particles.
Therefore, whenever added heat increases the average kinetic energy of particles of the
substance, it will increase the temperature of the substance. But when added heat is used to
change the state of substance, it does not change its temperature. Here, heat is used to weaken
the attractive forces between its particles, instead of increasing their average kinetic energy.
This happens at melting point and boiling point of the substance.
www.taleem360.com
During melting, the amount of heat is absorbed by the substance to change its state from solid to
liquid at its melting point without the change in its temperature. Similarly, the same amount of
heat is released by the same substance at its freezing point during solidification (from liquid to
solid). The same happens for boiling of a liquid and its condensation from vapour to solids at
boiling point. Heat energy absorbed during boiling is equal to heat energy released during
condensation. In all these processes, heat absorbed or released by the substance is used to
accommodate the attractive forces between its particles.
11.4.1 LATENT HEAT OF FUSION
The amount of heat energy required to convert a given mass of a substance from the solid state to
the liquid state without change in its temperature is called its latent heat of fusion. During
freezing, liquids release same amount of heat to change state to solids.
If AQ' is the amount of heat energy needed to melt mass 'm' of a solid to liquid (or freeze liquid to
solid), then mathematically:
AQ = mL₁
11.10
Where 'L,' is the specific latent heat of fusion of substance. It is defined as: The amount of heat
energy required to convert unit mass (one kilogram) of the solid at its melting point to liquid, (or
liquid into solid) without any change in temperature is called its specific latent heat of fusion (L₁).
AQ
L₁ =
11.11
m
The SI unit of specific latent heat of fusion is joule per kilogram which is expressed as J kg¹¹.
Different substances have different specific latent heat of fusion. Latent heat of fusion of ice is
3.33 × 10³ J kg¹.
61
National Book Foundation
UNIT 11
THERMAL TRANSFORMATIONS
Table 11.5: LATENT HEATS OF FUSION AND VAPORISATION OF SELECTED MATERIALS
Material
Melting Point
(°C)
Latent Heat of fusion
(J/kg)
Boiling Point
(°C)
Latent Heat of
Vaporisation (J/kg)
Helium
- 269.65
5.23 × 10³
- 269
2.09 × 104
Oxygen
- 218.79
1.38 × 104
-183
2.13 × 105
Water
0
3.33 × 105
100
2.26 × 106
Mercury
-39
1.13 × 104
357
2.93 × 105
Sulphur
119
3.81 × 104
445
3.26 × 105
Lead
327
2.45 × 104
1750
8.70 × 105
Aluminum
660
3.97 × 105
2450
1.14 × 107
Copper
1083
1.34 × 105
1187
5.06 × 106
Silver
961
8.82 × 104
2193
2.33 × 106
Gold
1063
6.44 × 104
2660
1.58 × 106
www.taleem360.com
11.4.2 LATENT HEAT OF VAPORISATION
The amount of heat energy required to convert a given mass of a substance from the liquid state
to the gaseous state without any change in its temperature is called its latent heat of
vaporization. During condensation same amount of heat is released by the gases to change its
state to liquids. If 'AQ' is the amount of heat energy needed to vaporize mass 'm' of a liquid to gas
(or condense gas to liquid), then mathematically:
AQ = mL₁
11.12
Where 'L' is the latent heat of vaporization of substance. It is defined as: The amount of heat
energy required to convert unit mass (one kilogram) of the liquid at its melting point to gas, (or
gas into liquid) without any change in temperature is called its specific latent heat of
vaporization of the solid.
AQ
L₁ =
11.13
m
The SI unit of specific latent heat of vaporization is joule per kilogram (Jkg¹). Different
substances have different specific latent heat of vaporization. Latent heat of vaporization of
water is 2.26 × 10° Jkg¹.
11.4.3 EXPERIMENT TO FIND LATENT HEAT OF FUSION OF ICE
1. Place a beaker over a stand as shown in figure 11.17.
2. Add small pieces of ice to the beaker.
National Book Foundation
62
THERMAL TRANSFORMATIONS
UNIT 11
3. To find out the ice's temperature, hang a thermometer inside
the beaker.
Iron
stand
Thermometer
4. Set a burner below the beaker.
5. Start calculating the time by stopwatch.
6. The ice will begin to melt.
7. Now, it will have mixture of ice and water but its
temperature will not rise above 0°C until all the ice melts.
Glass
stirrer
Beaker
Ice
8. Note the time which the ice takes to melt completely into
water at 0°C.
9. When all the ice converts to water, its temperature will begin
to rise. Continue heating the water at 0°C in the beaker. Its
temperature will begin to increase.
Burner
FIGURE 11.17
Experimental arrangement to
find latent heat fusion of ice
10. Note the time which the water in the beaker takes to reach
its boiling point at 100 °C from 0°C.
www.taleem360.com
11. Darw a temperature-time graph such as shown in figure
11.18.
Let's do some calculations to find the latent heat of fusion of ice from the graph data as follows:
Let, mass of ice = m
Finding the time from the graph:
i. Time taken by ice to melt completely at 0 °C (time for fusion) = t₁ = t₁ = 3.7 minutes
ii. Time taken by water for its temperature rise from 0 °C to 100 °C = t₂ - t₁ = 4.6 minutes
Specific heat of water = c = 4200 J kg¹ K¹
Increase in the temperature of water from 0 °C to 100
°C = AT = 100 °C = 100 K
Heat required by water to raise its temperature from
0 °C to 100 °C is given by:
120
100
80
60
Temperature °C
40
20
-20
putting values
AQ = mc AT
AQ = m(4,200 J kg¹ K´¹)(100 K)
AQ = m(4.2 x 10³ J kg¹)
This is the heat absorbed by water to raise its
temperature from 0 °C to 100 °C. This heat is
absorbed by the water in time t (4.6 minutes). Heat
is absorbed at uniform rate. So, Rate of absorption of
2
4
6
8
10
12
Time (minutes)
FIGURE 11.18
Temperature time graph for ice and water
63
National Book Foundation
UNIT 11
THERMAL TRANSFORMATIONS
heat (heat absorbed by the water in unit time) is given by:
AQ
Rate of absorption of heat =
t R
Rate of absorption of heat is same during fusion process time 't,' and raising temperature time
't'. Hence, Heat absorbed by the water in time 't' during fusion process is:
Total heat absorbed during fusion of ice = Rate of absorption of heat × Total time of fusion
AQ
t
AQf =
X tr = AQ X tr
1
R
t
as:
AQ = m X L
2
www.taleem360.com
Comparing equations 1 and 2:
m X L₁ = AQ X
tr
t R
Putting values in above equation and simplifying it:
mx L₁ = m(4.2 x 10³ J kg¹¹) x
3.7 min
4.6 min
Therefore, L₁ = 3.9x10³ J kg¹
The latent heat of fusion of ice found by the above experiment is 3.37 X 10³ J kg¹ while its actual
value is 3.36 × 10³ J kg¹.
11.4.4 EXPERIMENT TO FIND LATENT HEAT OF VAPORISATION OF WATER
To find latent heat of vaporization of water, we keep on heating beaker contains boiling water as
shown in figure 11.18. Continue heating water till all the water changes into steam. Note the time
taken by water to change completely into steam at its boiling
Iron
stand
Thermometer
point 100 °C. Extend the temperature-time graph such as
shown in figure 11.19. Let's calculate the latent heat of fusion
of ice from the data as follows:
Glass
stirrer
Time taken by water at 100 °C to change it into steam (time of
vaporization) = t₁ = t₃ = 24.4 min.
Beaker
In experiment to find latent heat of fusion L, we have
Boiling
Water
calculated the rate of absorption of heat by water.
AQ
Rate of absorption of heat by water =
t R
Burner
Total heat absorbed during vaporization of water = Rate of
absorption of heat × total time of vaporization:
FIGURE 11.19
Experimental arrangement to find
latent heat vaporization of water
AQ =
AQ xt=AQx
t
1
t R
tr
as:
AQ=mX L
2
National Book Foundation
64
THERMAL TRANSFORMATIONS
UNIT 11
Comparing equations 1 and 2:
m x L₁ = AQ X
tr
tr
Putting values in above equation and simplifying it:
m x L₁ = m(4.2 x 10³ J kg´¹)x
24.4 min
4.6 min
Therefore, L₁ = 2.23 x 10° J kg¹
120
100
80
60
Temperature °C
40
20
0
-20
-40
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
Time (minutes)
FIGURE 11.20 Temperature Vs Time graph for water
www.taleem360.com
The latent heat of vaporization of water found by the above experiment is 2.23 × 10° J kg¹ while
its actual value is 2.26 × 10° J kg¹.
From these two experiments we outline the following general procedural steps for calculating
latent heat of fusion and vaporization.
1. Take the solid at its melting point in a beaker and heat it at uniform rate.
2. Note the following time duration by the substance.
a. Time in which it completely melts without any change in its temperature at melting point
(fusion process)
b. Time in which its temperature rises from melting point to boiling point
c. Time in which it changes its state from liquid to gas without change in its temperature at its
boiling point (boiling process)
3. Calculate the heat absorbed by the substance during the time its temperature rises from
melting point to boiling point.
4. Calculate the rate of absorption of heat by dividing above calculated heat in point 3 by the time
in which its temperature rises.
65
National Book Foundation
UNIT 11
THERMAL TRANSFORMATIONS
AQ
Rate of absorption of heat =
tr
6. Latent heat of vaporization: To calculate late of vaporisation of substance, multiply this rate
of absorption of heat with time in which it changes its state from liquid to gas without change in
its temperature at its boiling point.
5. Latent heat of fusion: To calculate late of fusion of substance, multiply this rate of absorption
of heat with time in which it completely melts without any change in its temperature at melting
point.
Example 11.4
Find the amount of heat required for melting the ice-cream having mass 0.5 kg at 20 °C?
(Latent heat of fusion for ice-cream L₁ = 3.347 x 10³ J/kg, melting point of ice-cream is - 10
°C and specific heat capacity for ice-cream is c = 2.1 x 10³ J/kg °C).
GIVEN:
Mass of ice-cream 'm' = 0.5 kg
Initial temperature 'T₁' = 20 °C
Final temperature (melting point) = T = - 10 °C
Specific heat capacity of ice 'c' = 2.1 x 10³ J/kg °C
Latent heat of fusion 'L₁' = 3.347 x 10³ J/kg
REQUIRED:
Heat for melting ice-cream 'AQ' = ?
SOLUTION:
www.taleem360.com
Change in temperature is given by: AT = T - T = - 10 °C - (- 20 °C) = 10 °C
First, we will provide heat to increase the temperature of the ice-cream from 20 °C to -
10 °C (melting point).
putting values AQ₁ = mc AT
AQ₁ = (2.1x10³ J kg¹°C´¹)(0.5 kg)(10 °C)
Hence, AQ₁ = 1.05 x 104 J
Now we will find heat required for melting ice-cream at its melting point is: AQ₂ = mL₁
putting values AQ₂ = (0.5 kg)(3.347 x 10³ J kg´¹) = 16.735 x 104 J
Total heat required will be: AQ = AQ₁ + AQ₂
putting values AQ = 1.05 x 104 J kg¹ + 16.735 × 104 J kg¹
Therefore, AQ = 17.785 × 104 J = 177.85 k J
ANSWER
So, a total of 177.85 kJ of heat will be required to melt an ice-cream of 0.5 kg at -20 °C.
National Book Foundation
66
THERMAL TRANSFORMATIONS
UNIT 11
11.5 PRESSURE EXERTED BY GAS PARTICLES
The molecules of a gas are in a state of continuous random motion in a
container. They collide with one another and also with the walls of the
container, as shown in figure 11.21. Pressure is the measure of force
exerted by the gas particles on unit area of the walls of the container
perpendicularly.
Force exerted by particle due to collision
Pressure =
Area of the walls of container
F
or P =
A
FIGURE 11.21
Random motion gas
particles in a container
www.taleem360.com
Pressure in a gas in a container change with change in temperature,
volume and amount of substance (number of particles).
A. Effect of temperature: If the temperature of the gas increases, the particles move faster.
Faster particles collide with the walls with greater force and more frequently. This increases the
pressure of the gas in the container. Pressure of the gas will decrease if its temperature
decreases. So, the pressure of a gas inside a container is directly proportional to its temperature
provided the volume remains constant.
B. Effect of volume: Pressure of a gas is inversely proportional to its volume if its temperature is
kept constant (Boyle's law). If the volume of the container is reduced while keeping the number
of particles constant, particles have less space to move around. This increases the number of
collisions of its particles with the walls, which results in increase in pressure. Conversely, if the
volume is increased, particles have more space and collide with the walls less frequently, which
decreases the pressure as shown in figure 11.22.
C. Effect of amount of gas (number of particles): By increasing the number of particles of the gas
in a fixed volume increases the number of collisions of gas molecules with the walls of the
container and hence, it increases the pressure of the gas in the container. By decreasing the
number of particles of the gas in the container, its pressure will decrease as shown in figure
11.22.
More frequent collision of gas molecules with the
More frequent collision of gas molecules with the
container wall as the particles have more energy.
container wall.
Increase the
temperature
Increase the
Pressure
Gas molecules collide
with the walls
Gas molecules collide
with the walls
FIGURE 11.22 Effect of temperature and volume on pressure of gas
67
National Book Foundation
UNIT 11
THERMAL TRANSFORMATIONS
11.6 SUPERCONDUCTIVITY
When we connect a wire or a device like bulb with
the cell, current flows through it. Current flow
means in free electrons in the wire move through gaps
between the atoms of the conductor. But they
collide with the atoms of the conductor. This cause a
hindrance to their flow which is called resistance of
Electrical Resistivity
Superconductor
Normal Metal
T
the conductor and if we relate it with the material
then it is called specific resistance or resistivity of FIGURE 11.23 Superconductors
the material of the conductor. Atoms of the
conductor are in vibrational motion. With decrease
Table 11.6 CRITICAL TEMPERATURES
in temperature, their amplitude of vibration
OF SOME SUBSTANCES
decreases. This increases the size of the gap
Critical
between the atoms. Due to which collisions of
Substance
temperature
flowing electrons with the atoms of the conductor
decrease and hence, resistivity of the material also
Mercury (Sb)
4.2 K
decreases.
Aluminum (Al)
1.18 K
www.taleem360.com
If we keep on decreasing the temperature then at a
Tin (Sn)
3.72 K
certain temperature (critical temperature) comes
Lead (Pb)
7.2 K
when resistivity of the material becomes zero and
Yttrium Barium Copper Oxide
92 K
then the material is called superconductor.
(YBCO)
Superconductors are those material through which
Bismuth Strontium Calcium
108 K
current flows without resistance.
Copper Oxide (BSCCO)
The general graph relating superconductor and normal metal is shown in figure 11.23.
Superconductivity was discovered by Dutch physicist Heike Kamerlingh Onnes in 1911. While
studying the properties of materials at very low temperatures, he observed that electrical
resistance of mercury becomes zero when cooled to about 4.2 Kelvin (-268.95 °C). He got Nobel
Prize in Physics in 1913.
National Book Foundation
68
THERMAL TRANSFORMATIONS
UNIT 11
DO YOU KNOW?
(a) Magnetic levitation (Maglev)
trains
(b) Magnetic levitation by
superconductors
Critical Temperature: The
temperature at which and below
which the resistance and
resistivity of substance become
zero is called the critical
temperature or superconducting
transition temperature.
FIGURE 11.24 Applications of superconductors
Superconductors are used in powerful electromagnets, particle accelerators, magnetic levitation
(Maglev) trains as shown in figure 11.24 (a), small but powerful electric motors, fast computer
chips, and potentially more efficient power transmission lines. Researchers continue to explore
ways to achieve superconductivity at higher temperatures, which would make it more practical
for everyday use.
www.taleem360.com
SUMMARY
• Freezing is the phenomenon in which liquid changes into solid.
• Melting is the phenomenon in which solid changes into liquid.
• Vaporization is the phenomenon in which a liquid is converted into gas (vapours) upon
boiling.
• Evaporation is phenomenon of conversion liquid into vapours at any temperature.
• Condensation is a phenomenon in which gases (vapours) change into liquids.
• Sublimation is a phenomenon in which solids change directly into gases.
• Deposition is a phenomenon in which gas changes directly to solid.
• Thermal expansion means "increase in size of matter on heating".
• Linear thermal expansion of solids is increase in length of substance on heating.
• Volume thermal expansion of solids is increase in volume of substance on heating.
• Coefficient of linear thermal expansion is the fractional change in length per kelvin
change in temperature.
• Coefficient of volume thermal expansion is the fractional change in volume per kelvin
change in temperature.
• Real volume expansion is thermal expansion in volume of liquid when it is heated directly.
• Apparent volume expansion is thermal expansion of volume of liquid in a container
without considering the expansion of its container.
69
National Book Foundation
UNIT 11
EXERCISE
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS
QI. Choose the best possible option in the following questions.
1. If a body performing simple harmonic motion completes its one vibration in 2 seconds, its
frequency of vibration is:
A. 2 Hz
B. 1 Hz
C. 0.5 Hz
D. 10 Hz
2. 360 waves are passing through a point in a river in one hour, time period of the wave is:
A. 0.1 s
B. 1 s
C. 10 s
D. 100 s
www.taleem360.com
3. Time period of electrical vibrator of ripple tank is 0.5 s, water waves in ripple tank has
speed of 10 m/s and amplitude of 5 cm. Calculate the frequency of the waves.
A. 50 Hz
B. 0.5 Hz
C. 200 Hz
D. 2 Hz
4. Which of the followings is longitudinal wave?
A. X-rays
B. Light
C. String waves
D. Sound
5. When water waves enter from deep water to shallow water:
A. Frequency of water waves increases B. Time period of water waves decreases
C. Speed of water waves decreases D. Wavelength of water waves increases
6. Listening to radio transmission in deep valleys of mountain areas is due to:
A. Reflection of waves
B. Refraction of waves
C. Interference of waves
D. Diffraction of waves
7. Which of the following are transverse waves:
A. X-rays
B. Light
C. String waves
D. All of these
8. Tsunamis are most often generated by
A. Flood
B. Bomb blast
C. Earth quake
D. None of these
9. Waves transfer:
A. energy
B. frequency
C. wavelength
D. velocity
10. Which of the following characteristics of a wave is independent of the others?
A. speed
B. frequency
C. amplitude
D. wavelength
11. The relation between v, f and λ of a wave is:
A. Vf=λ
B. fλ=v
C. vλ=f
D. v=λ/f
National Book Foundation
70
THERMAL TRANSFORMATIONS
UNIT 11
2. Fog forms on a cold window pane in the morning. Which change of state is occurring?
A. Melting
B. Boiling
C. Condensation
D. Deposition
3. Which process involves the change of state from a gas to a solid without passing through the
liquid phase?
A. Deposition
B. Melting
C. Freezing
D. Sublimation
4. Boiling point of water is:
A. 212 °C
B. 212 °F
C. 100 K
D. 373 °C
5. J kg¹ K¹ is the unit of:
A. specific Heat Capacity
B. heat Capacity
C. latent Heat of Fusion
D. heat Energy
www.taleem360.com
6. Evaporation takes place from
A. surface
B. bottom
C. center
D. any location
7. Relation between linear and volume expansion of solids is
A. B = a/3
B. B = 1.5 a
C. a = B/3
D. a = 3 B
8. Heat added to a substance, at its melting pointing, is used to:
A. Increase K.E. of particle.
B. Decrease K.E. of particles
C. Increase the attraction between particles
D. Decrease the attraction between particles
9. 336 J/g is latent heat of fusion of a material. How much heat is required to melt 10 g of
material at its melting point?
A. 336 J
B. 3360 J
C. 33600 J
D. 3.36 x 107 J
10. Which of the following factors increases the rate of evaporation?
A. Decrease in temperature
B. Increase in humidity
C. Increase in wind speed
D. Decrease in surface area
11. What is value of a for a solid if its B is 9 × 10³ K´¹?
A. 3 x 10³ K¹
B. 4.5 x 10³ K¹
C. 9 x 10³ K¹
D. 27 x 10³ K´¹
12. The process that involves the latent heat of vaporization is
A. Melting of ice B. Freezing of water C. Evaporation
D. Condensation of steam
13. The sum and difference of the coefficient of real and apparent expansion of a liquid are in
the ratio 2:1. The ratio of the coefficient of real expansion and apparent expansion must
be
A. 1:1
B. 2:1
C. 2:3
D. 3:1
71
National Book Foundation
UNIT 11
THERMAL TRANSFORMATIONS
14. Latent heat refers to the energy absorbed or released by a substance during a change of
state, but with no change in temperature. What does "latent" mean in this context?
A. Constant
B. Visible
C. Hidden
D. Transparent
CONSTRUCTED RESPONSE QUESTIONS
QII. Follow the directions to respond to the following questions.
1. Look at these graphs for heating the ice, Energy (E)-time (t) graph shows that energy is
being supplied to ice at constant rate to change it into liquid and finally into steam. While the
temperature (T)-time (t) graph shows that change of temperature of ice and water during
different stages.
a. There are two horizontal parts of this graph, where temperature is not changing but energy
is being supplied to substance at constant rate. Explain why does temperature not change at
these two stages?
b. Explain why the temperature and energy trends are not same for the same time intervals.
www.taleem360.com
Temperature °C
T
Energy
Time (s)
Time (s)
2. A heater supplies energy at a constant rate to a 100g of a substance. The variation with time
of the temperature of the substance is shown in the figure. The substance is perfectly
insulated from its surroundings. The power of the heater is 250 W.
From the figure, answer the following questions:
60
a. What is melting and boiling point of the
substance?
50
Temperature °C
40
b. How long does it take to melt completely and
how long does it take to vaporise from liquid
30
state?
20
10
c. How much temperature increases in its liquid
0
phase (x part of the graph)?
5
10
15
20
25
d. Calculate latent heat of vaporization of the
Time / min
substance?
National Book Foundation
72
THERMAL TRANSFORMATIONS
UNIT 11
SHORT RESPONSE QUESTIONS
QIII. Give a short response to the following questions.
1. Why do dew-drops form on leaves and grass in a spring morning?
2. What is the effect of pressure and temperature variation on sublimation and deposition?
3. Why do vapors form on the handle and cylinder of a fire extinguisher when it is discharged?
4. How does sweating helps to cool our body down during exercise?
5. Consider a piece of metal X initially at a temperature of 100 °C. It is placed on a heater
(which is providing heat at constant rate) until it reaches a final temperature of 400 °C. The
metal has a melting point of 250 °C.
(i) Draw a temperature-time graph illustrating the changes in temperature of metal X as it is
heated.
(ii) Now, examine a different metal, Y, which has a higher latent heat of fusion compared to
metal X. Both metals have identical melting points and heat capacities. The heating
procedure for metal Y is conducted under the same energy supply rate as metal X. Describe
how the temperature-time graph for metal Y will differ from that of metal X, considering
the implications of its greater latent heat of fusion.
6. How does the pressure in a car tyre change during a long drive on a hot day?
7. How does understanding thermal expansion help prevent cracks in sidewalks during hot
weather?
8. Imagine you are stuck in the snow with your car. Which would be more effective for melting
the snow trapped underneath, a pot of hot water or a high-powered heat lamp?
9. How does the evaporation of water from a plant's leaves help to transport water and
nutrients throughout the plant?
10. Why does air conditioning cool a drink more effectively than adding cold water?
11. What are the challenges associated with maintaining the extremely low temperatures
required for superconductivity to occur?
www.taleem360.com
LONG RESPONSE QUESTIONS
QIV. Give a detailed response to the following questions.
1. Explain the production of sound waves with examples.
2. Justify why sound waves cannot travel in a vacuum. Design an experiment that
demonstrates this principle.
3. What is nature of sound waves? How is sound propagated? Explain.
4. Discuss how changes in amplitude and frequency affect the loudness and pitch of sound
waves.
5. What is quality of sound? How do the shape and material of a sound source influence the
waveform of the sound it produces.
6. Explain the speed of sound in different media. How does the speed of sound differ in solids,
liquids, and gases? Explain why, and discuss real-world implications.
7. Distinguish between reflection and refraction by describing how each process affects wave
direction and speed. Design an experiment to demonstrate both phenomena using a ripple
tank, and evaluate how changes in medium affect each process.
73
National Book Foundation
UNIT 11
THERMAL TRANSFORMATIONS
4. What are linear and volume thermal expansion of solids? Discuss qualitatively the factors
upon which these thermal expansions depend.
5. What are uses of thermal expansion in our daily life? Give examples
6. Explain thermal expansion of liquids in detail.
7. Discuss the application of bimetallic strips in temperature control devices like thermostats.
Explain the principle of thermal expansion that allows the bimetallic strip to function, and
illustrate how the differing expansion rates of the two metals are utilized in practical.
8. What is superconductivity? Explain the phenomenon in detail. What is their scope in future
world?
NUMERICAL RESPONSE QUESTIONS
QV. Solve the questions given below.
1. Consider a steel bar of length 1.5m at 10 °C. It is heated to raise its temperature to 100 °C.
Calculate (a) Increase in length (b) Final length at 100 °C. (Coefficient of linear thermal
expansion of steel is 1.2 x 10³ K´¹)
(Ans. 1.62 mm, 1.5 m)
www.taleem360.com
2. A solid cube of side length 10 cm at 25 °C is heated. What will be increase in its volume at
125 °C if its coefficient of linear thermal expansion is 9 × 10° K¹.
(Ans. 2.7 cm³)
3. A steel railroad track segment is 10 meters long at a cool morning temperature of 15 °C.
The coefficient of linear expansion for steel is 1.2 x 10³ per °C. Later in the day, the
temperature rises to 30 °C. How much will the steel track segment expand in length?
(Ans. 1.8 mm)
4. A 2-liter (2000 cm³) glass bottle is filled completely with orange juice at a room
temperature of 20 °C. The coefficient of volumetric expansion for orange juice is 5 x 104
per °C. If the bottle is left in a hot car where the temperature reaches 40 °C, what volume
of orange juice will overflow? Expansion of glass bottle is negligible.
(Ans. 2 cm³)
5. How much heat is required to change 15 kg of ice into water at its melting point?
(Ans. 4.95 x 10° J)
6. How much heat is required to change 7 kg of water into steam at its boiling point?
(Ans. 1.58 x 107 J)
7. 4 kg of ice has temperature of -20 °C. It is heated to convert into steam. Its final
temperature is 120 °C. Calculate the total amount of heat energy involve for this
conversion of ice into steam. (Specific heat of ice = 2100 J kg¹ K¹,Specific heat of water =
4200 J kg¹ K´¹,Specific heat of steam = 2000 J kg¹ K¹, Latent heat of fusion of ice = 3.3 x
10³ J kg´¹ and Latent heat of vaporization of water = 2.26 × 10° J kg´¹).
(Ans. 1.236 × 107 J)
National Book Foundation
74
Unit
12
WAVES
How do large waves
generate in a tsunami?
www.taleem360.com
STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES
The students will:
✓ [SLO: P-10-D-01] Prove that waves transfer energy without transferring matter
✓ [SLO: P-10-D-02] Describe what is meant by wave motion [as illustrated by vibrations in ropes and springs and
by experiments using water waves.]
✓ [SLO: P-10-D-03] Describe the features of a wave [in terms of wavefront, wavelength, frequency, time
period, crest (peak), trough, compression, rarefaction, amplitude and wave speed]
✓ [SLO: P-10-D-04] Define the terms frequency, wavelength, and amplitude.
✓ [SLO: P-10-D-05] Recall and apply the equation wave speed = frequency x wavelength (v=fλ)
✓ [SLO: P-10-D-06] Illustrate that for a transverse wave, the direction of vibration is at right angles to the
direction of the energy transfer [including giving examples such as electromagnetic radiation, waves on the
surface of water, and seismic S-waves (secondary)]
✓ [SLO: P-10-D-07] Illustrate that for a longitudinal wave, the direction of vibration is parallel to the direction
of the energy transfer [including give examples such as sound waves and seismic P-waves (primary)]
✓ [SLO: P-10-D-08] Describe how waves can undergo reflection, refraction and diffraction
✓ [SLO: P-10-D-09] Describe how wavelength affects diffraction at an edge
✓ [SLO: P-10-D-10] Analyze the phenomenon of tsunamis generated under the surface of water [in terms of
underwater earthquakes/volcanic activity generating waves that increase in frequency and amplitude as
they encounter increasingly shallow water]
✓ [SLO: P-10-D-11] Describe how wavelength and gap size affects diffraction through a gap
UNIT 12
WAVES
Waves are a fundamental aspect of both the natural world and technological advancements,
embodying the transfer of energy and information across various mediums. From the gentle
ripples on a pond to the powerful surges of ocean tides, waves are omnipresent, influencing
weather patterns, communication systems, and even the fundamental structure of matter.
Understanding waves involves exploring their properties, behaviors, and the principles governing
their propagation, which are crucial in fields ranging from physics and engineering to medicine
and environmental science. This introduction delves into the fascinating world of waves,
unraveling their complexities and highlighting their significance in our daily lives and the broader
universe.
12.1 WAVE MOTION
www.taleem360.com
Waves play an important role in our daily life. It is because waves are carrier of energy and
information over large distances. Waves require some oscillating or vibrating source. Here we
demonstrate the production and propagation of different waves with the help of vibratory motion
of objects, some of the waves are water waves, sound waves, electromagnetic waves etc.
12.1.1 WATER WAVES
When a stone is thrown into the water, it creates
ripples that propagate outward. These ripples, or
water waves, clearly transfer energy: you can see
the motion of the boat bobbing up and down as the
waves pass. However, the boat itself does not
significantly move from its position. This illustrates
that the energy from the wave causes the boat to
oscillate vertically, but the boat (matter) remains
mostly in the same place.
FIGURE 12.1 Water Waves
MINI LAB
When you drop a stone into a pond, it creates
waves on the water's surface that spread
outwards. If you place a cork a little distance
away from where the stone fell, the cork will
start to bob up and down as the waves reach it.
This happens because the cork is getting energy
from the waves.
This activity demonstrates that water waves, like other types of waves, transfer energy from one place to
another without actually moving the water itself.
National Book Foundation
76
WAVES
UNIT 12
12.1.2 SOUND WAVES
When you speak, your vocal cords vibrate,
producing sound waves that travel through the air.
If you place your hand in front of a speaker, you can
feel the vibrations of the sound waves, which
indicates that energy is being transferred.
However, the air molecules themselves do not
travel from the speaker to your hand; they oscillate
back and forth around their equilibrium positions.
This oscillatory motion transfers the sound energy
through the medium (air), but the individual air
molecules stay relatively in place.
FIGURE 12.2 Sound Waves
www.taleem360.com
12.1.3 ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES
Consider light waves or radio waves, which are
types of electromagnetic waves. When light from
the sun reaches Earth, it brings energy that warms
the planet and powers photosynthesis in plants.
However, there is no medium like air or water
involved in the transfer of electromagnetic waves
through the vacuum of space. Instead, electric and
magnetic fields oscillate perpendicular to each FIGURE 12.3 Electromagnetic Waves
other and the direction of wave propagation,
carrying energy across vast distances without the
need for a material medium.
Movement of energy
12.1.4 WAVE IN ROPE
A transverse wave in a rope provides a clear example of
Vibration of rope
transverse wave motion, where the oscillations of
the medium (the rope) are perpendicular to the
direction of wave propagation.
A
B
FIGURE 12.4 Waves in Rope
12.2 WAVE PROPAGATION
The key to understanding wave energy transfer without matter transfer lies in the nature of wave
propagation. Waves are disturbances that travel through a medium (or space, in the case of
electromagnetic waves), causing particles of the medium to oscillate around their equilibrium
positions. Here's a step-by-step explanation:
77
National Book Foundation
UNIT 12
WAVES
12.2.1 OSCILLATION
In a wave, particles of the medium experience periodic
oscillations or vibrations. These oscillations can be
longitudinal (particles move parallel to the wave
direction, as in sound waves) or transverse (particles
move perpendicular to the wave direction, as in water
and electromagnetic waves).
INFORMATION
12.2.2 ENERGY TRANSFER
Generating a high frequency wave,
requires more energy per second than
to generate a low frequency wave.
Thus, a high frequency wave carries
more energy than a low frequency
wave of the same amplitude.
The energy of the wave is transferred through these
oscillations. For example, in a sound wave, compressions
and rarefactions of air molecules transfer kinetic and
potential energy from one particle to the next.
www.taleem360.com
12.2.3 NO NET MOVEMENT
Despite the oscillatory motion,
SCIENCE
TIDBITS
the particles of the medium do
A human
eardrum can
not undergo a net displacement.
oscillate back
They return to their original
and forth up to
20,000 times in
positions after the wave passes.
one second.
Therefore, there is no overall
transfer of matter, only energy.
12.3 CHARACTERISTIC WAVE PARAMETERS
There are many ways to describe or measure a wave. Some characteristics depend on how the
wave is produced, whereas others depend on the medium through which the wave travels.
Certain characteristic wave parameters and their definitions are given as under.
12.3.1 WAVELENGTH 'λ'
The shortest distance between points where the wave pattern repeats itself is called the
wavelength, its symbol is the Greek letter lambda 'λ'.
The unit of wavelength is 'm'. The wavelength is the repeated
Wavelength
Crest
Crest
distance of the wave pattern-a shift of the wave pattern by one
wavelength to the right (or the left) reproduces the original
wave pattern. The wave length may be the distance between
Trough
two successive crests or troughs as shown in figure 12.5, or it
may be the distance between two successive compressions.
FIGURE 12.5 Wavelength
National Book Foundation
78
WAVES
UNIT 12
12.3.2 WAVEFRONT
Huygens stated that light is a wave propagating through space like
ripples in water or sound in air. Hence, light spreads out like a wave
in all directions from a source. The locus of all points that travelled
some distance during a fixed interval is called a wavefront.
Wavefront
FIGURE 12.6 Wavefront
12.3.3 WAVE CREST AND TROUGH
A crest point on a wave is the maximum value of
upward displacement within a cycle. A crest is a
Crest
point on a surface wave where the displacement
of the medium is at a maximum. A trough is the
opposite of a crest, so the minimum or lowest
point in a cycle.
Trough
FIGURE 12.7 Wave Crest & Wave Trough
www.taleem360.com
12.3.4 DISPLACEMENT
The separation between mean
Wavelength
Wavelength
position and any point either on
right or left of the mean position is
called displacement (x).
Amplitude
Amplitude
Position
Displacement is measured in meters
(m).
Longer Wavelength
Higher Amplitude
12.3.5 AMPLITUDE
Shorter Wavelength
Lower Amplitude
The maximum displacement form
FIGURE 12.8 Displacement & Amplitude
mean on either side is called amplitude
(x). As amplitude is also a
displacement that's why is measured in
meters (m).
12.3.6 TIME PERIOD
The maximum displacement form mean on either side is called amplitude (x). As amplitude is
also a displacement that's why is measured in meters (m).
12.3.7 FREQUENCY
The number of cycles completed by an oscillating body in one second is called frequency (f). It is
measured in cycles per second (cps) or hertz (Hz).
79
National Book Foundation
UNIT 12
WAVES
12.3.8 RELATION BETWEEN TIME PERIOD AND FREQUENCY
Time period and frequency are reciprocal of each other. Greater the time period smaller will be
the frequency and vice versa.
1
T =
12.1
f
Example 12.1
Astudent oscillates a pendulum having 5 vibrations per second, Calculate its time period.
GIVEN:
Frequency 'f' = 5 Hz
REQUIRED:
Time Period 'T' = ?
SOLUTION:
www.taleem360.com
1
Using frequency-time relation, we have:
T =
f
putting values
T = 0.2s
1
5 Hz
ANSWER
Therefore
So the pendulum will oscillate with a period of 0.2 s.
12.4 WAVES AND THEIR TYPES
Waves are carrier of energy and information over large distances. Wave is a disturbance that
moves outward from its point of origin, transferring energy by means of vibrations with little or no
transport of medium.
Direction of energy transfer
Wave motion is related to oscillation as
particles of the medium execute simple
harmonic motion about their mean
position when a wave passes. For
(a)
example, take a rope and colour a part of
it. Attach one end of the rope to the wall
and wiggle the other end continuously. A
Direction of oscillation of
colored part of rope
wave train will be produced. The colored
part of rope will execute oscillations
(b)
about certain mean position, as shown in
figure 12.9 (b).
FIGURE 12.9 Direction of energy and oscillation
12.5 TYPES OF WAVES ON THE BASIS OF MEDIUM
Waves are divided into two types on the basis of medium requirement.
A. Mechanical waves: Such types of waves which require material medium to propagate from one
National Book Foundation
80
WAVES
UNIT 12
POINT TO
PONDER
We receive sun light (electromagnetic
wave) but not the sound (mechanical
wave) of fusion reactions occurring at
the surface of earth. It is because
there is vacuum in between earth and
sun. Light waves can travel in vacuum
but sound waves cannot.
point to another point are called mechanical waves. If medium does not exist, mechanical waves
cannot travel from one point to another point. For
example, sound wave, rock wave in water, seismic
wave etc.
Electric field
www.taleem360.com
B. Electromagnetic waves: Such type of waves
which do not require material medium to propagate
Magnetic
from one point to another point are called
field
electromagnetic waves. It means that the existence
of material medium is not necessary for propagation
Travelling
direction
of electromagnetic waves. It consists of electric and
magnetic fields as shown in figure 12.10. Examples
of electromagnetic waves are light waves, x-rays,
Travelling of
FIGURE 12.10 Electromagnetic wave
ultraviolet waves, infrared waves etc.
12.6 TYPES OF WAVES ON THE BASIS OF PROPAGATION
Waves are divided into two types on the basis of their propagation.
12.6.1 TRANSVERSE WAVES
The type of waves in which the disturbance occur perpendicular to the direction of motion of the
waves are termed as transverse waves. This means the vibrations are at right angles to the wave's
motion as shown in figure 12.11. Transverse
displacement
waves are common in nature and can be
wavelength
direction of travel
Crest
observed in various forms. Waves produced in a
string when its one end is fixed to a support and
amplitude
the other end is moved up and down is an
time
example of transverse waves.
Trough
A. Electromagnetic Radiation:
Electromagnetic waves, such as light, X-rays,
and radio waves, are examples of transverse FIGURE 12.11 Transverse Waves
waves. These waves do not require a medium
81
National Book Foundation
UNIT 12
WAVES
to travel. The electric and magnetic fields vibrate at right angles to each other and to the
direction of energy transfer. For example, sunlight travels through space as an electromagnetic
wave, bringing energy from the Sun to Earth.
DO YOU KNOW?
B. Waves on the Surface of Water: Waves on the surface
Do mechanical waves pass through
of water are another example of transverse waves. The
vacuum, that is, empty space?
water particles move up and down (vibration), while the
wave energy travels horizontally across the surface. For
DO YOU KNOW?
instance, when a stone is thrown into a pond, ripples
spread outwards from the point of impact, showing the
transverse motion of the water particles.
www.taleem360.com
C. Seismic S-Waves (Secondary Waves): Seismic S-waves,
produced during earthquakes, are transverse waves that
move through the Earth. In these waves, the ground
Earthquake produces waves through
the crust of the Earth in the form of
seismic waves. By studying such
waves, the geophysicists learn about
the internal structure of the Earth and
information about the occurrence of
future Earth activity.
vibrates side-to-side or up-and-down, while the wave
energy travels horizontally. Unlike P-waves, S-waves
cannot travel through liquids, as they require the shear
strength of a solid medium for their vibrations. These
waves are critical in understanding the Earth's interior and
locating earthquake epicenters.
12.6.2 LONGITUDINAL WAVES
Type of waves in which the disturbance occur parallel to the line of travel of the wave are termed
as longitudinal waves. This means that the vibrations and the energy transfer occur along the
same line. A longitudinal wave can be generated with a Slinky, as shown in Figure12.12. When one
end is pushed forward along its length (i.e., longitudinally) and then pulled back to its starting
point, as in part a, the wave will follow it and some distance is compressed.
Parts of the wave having higher density and pressure are called compressions and parts having
smaller density and pressure are called rarefactions.
A. Sound Waves: Sound waves are a classic
wavelength
example of longitudinal waves. When we
direction of energy
amplitude
speak, the air particles near our vocal cords
compress and expand, creating regions of
compression (where particles are close
compression
rarefaction
compression
together) and rarefaction (where particles
are spread apart). These compressions and
rarefactions move through the air, carrying
motion of particles
sound energy to the listener. For instance, FIGURE 12.12 Longitudinal Waves
National Book Foundation
82
WAVES
UNIT 12
SCIENCE
TIDBITS
When you pluck a guitar string, it produces
transverse waves along the string, meaning
the vibrations move perpendicular to the length
of the string. These transverse vibrations then
cause the air around the string to vibrate,
producing sound waves.
Sound waves are longitudinal waves, which mean the vibrations
occur in the same direction as the wave travels, compressing and
rarefying the air molecules to create the sound we hear. So, while
the motion on the string is transverse, the resulting sound waves in
the air are longitudinal.
when we clap, the sound travels as longitudinal waves through the air to reach someone nearby.
B. Seismic P-Waves (Primary Waves): Seismic P-waves, generated during earthquakes, are
another example of longitudinal waves. These waves cause particles in the Earth to vibrate back
and forth in the same direction as the wave's movement. P-waves are the fastest type of seismic
wave and can travel through solids and liquids. These characteristics helps scientists study the
Earth's structure and detect earthquakes. For example, the time difference between the arrival
of P-waves and slower S-waves at a seismic station helps determine the location of the
earthquake's epicenter.
www.taleem360.com
INFORMATION
Longitudinal waves move faster through solids than
through gases or liquids. Transverse waves move
through solids at a speed of less than half of the speed
of longitudinal waves. It is because the restoring force
exerted during this up and down motion of particles of
the medium is less than the restoring force exerted by
Fastest in solids
Slowest in gases
a back and forth motion of particles of the medium in
case of longitudinal waves.
12.7 WAVE CHARACTERISTICS
Some of the main characteristics of waves are as follows:
A. Wave Cycle: As a wave passes a given point along its path, that point undergoes cyclic motion.
The point is displaced first in one direction and then in the other direction. Finally, the point
returns to its original equilibrium position, thereby completing one cycle. Number of wave cycles
are represented by 'N'. As it is a pure number, so it has no unit.
National Book Foundation
83
UNIT 12
WAVES
B. Frequency: The number of wave cycles passing through some point per unit time is called
frequency of the waves. Mathematically:
N
f=
12.2
t
Frequency is measured in Hertz (Hz).
C. Time Period: The time required for one wave cycle to pass through certain point is called Time
Period. .It is represented by "T" and its unit seconds (s).It is the time any vibrating element of
wave takes to move through one complete oscillation. The time period is the reciprocal of frequency.
Mathematically:
1
T=
12.3
f
D. Wave Speed: The distance travelled by a wave per unit time is called wave speed.
Mathematically:
Ad
Wave speed v=
At
1
www.taleem360.com
If a wave travels distance equal to its wavelength 'λ', then the time taken will be equal to its time
period 'T'. Putting these values in equation 1:
λ
V=
2
T
As frequency is reciprocal of time period, given from equation 12.3, putting in equation 2:
V=fλ
12.4
Equation 12.4 is a universal wave equation that can be used for all types of waves. For
electromagnetic waves travelling with speed 'c', equation 12.4 can be given by:
c=fλ
12.5
Example 12.2
An athlete in the gym moves to the gym moves one end of a rope up and down, whose other end is fastened
with a wall, with a speed of 2.5 m/s. It produces oscillations whose wavelength is 0.5 m.
Calculate the frequency of waves generated in the rope.
GIVEN:
Wavelength 'λ' = 0.5 m
Wave speed 'v' = 0.5 m/s
REQUIRED:
Frequency 'f' = ?
SOLUTION:
By universal wave equation:
v = fλ
or
f=
V
λ
putting values
f=
2.5m/s
0.5m
Therefore
f=5Hz
ANSWER
The rope therefore oscillates at 5 times per second.
National Book Foundation
84
WAVES
UNIT 12
Example 12.3
Find the wavelengths of the lowest and highest frequency sounds that human can hear
which travels with a speed of 343 m/s in air?
GIVEN:
Lowest frequency 'f₁' = 20 Hz
Highest frequency 'f₂' = 20,000 Hz
Speed of sound 'v' = 343 m/s
REQUIRED:
Low Wavelength 'λ₁'= ?
High Wavelength 'λ₂'= ?
SOLUTION:
By universal wave equation:
v = fλ
or
λ =
V
f
For lowest frequency sound, the above equation becomes: λ₁ =
www.taleem360.com
V
f₁
putting values
λ₁ =
343m/s
20 Hz
Therefore
λ₁=17.15m
ANSWER
Similarly for highest frequency sound:
λ₂ =
V
f₂
putting values
λ₂ =
343m/s
20,000 Hz
Therefore
λ₂ = 0.017m
ANSWER
12.8 PROPERTIES OF WAVES
The basic properties of waves like reflection, refraction and diffraction can be described with the
help of a ripple tank by using water waves. Ripple tank is also used to calculate frequency,
wavelength and speed of waves on water's surface. It also analyzes the characteristics of waves
like transverse and longitudinal behavior.
Lamp
Stand
Vibrator
Motion of
dipper
Elastic
bands
Water surface
Plane
dipper
Shallow
water tray
Motion of
dipper
Spherical
dipper
Wave pattern
on screen
Screen
FIGURE 12.13 Ripple Tank Experiment
85
National Book Foundation
UNIT 12
WAVES
Basic Construction and working: A ripple tank consists of shallow tray of water with a transparent
base, usually illuminated from above, so that light shines through the water. The ripples on the
water show up as shadows (bright and dark lines) on the screen underneath the tank. The ripples
are created by a small electric motor (vibrator). The motor has an off-center weight attached.
When the motor is turned-on, it makes the strip vibrate and thus create ripples on the surface of
water. Straight waves in the water are created by a small electric motor.
In order to get consistent plane waves, the motor assembly is lowered until it just touches the
surface of water and the motor is then turned on. You should be able to see straight waves being
created which travel across the surface of the tank, often called plane waves.
By lighting the wavefronts being created, clear peaks and troughs can be seen on the screen as
shown in figure 12.13. The imaginary surface representing corresponding points (crests and
troughs) of a wave that vibrate in unison is called a wavefront. It may be plane or
spherical depending upon the dipper used
www.taleem360.com
12.8.1 REFLECTION
The change in direction of a wave front at an
Incident ray
Reflected ray
interface between two different media or rigid
barrier so that the wavefront returns in to the
medium from which it is originated is called FIGURE 12.14 Reflection of Waves
reflection as shown in figure 12.14. When a
wavefront strikes a rigid barrier or
irregular surface, it is reflected back along its
original path.
12.8.2 REFRACTION
When waves travel from one medium into another its speed changes and in some cases divert from
its original path, the phenomenon is called refraction. When a water wave enters a medium in
which it moves more slowly, its wavelength decreases as well.
Wave front
The phenomenon of refraction can be
Boundary
wave direction
demonstrated in the ripple tank by using a
boundary between shallow and deep water. A thick
wave
direction
ray
plastic sheet is placed in the tray at some angle to
the wavefront. When water waves travel from
deep water to shallow water, its wavelength
shallow water
deep water
shortened and its speed slows down. This is
shown in figure 12.15.
FIGURE 12.15 Refraction of Waves
National Book Foundation
86
WAVES
UNIT 12
MINI LAB
Place a pencil in the water, placing it
so that it is tipped to one side. Look
through the front of the glass and
notice that the pencil is bent. The
science behind it: Light "bends" when
it passes though one substance to
another of a different density.
12.8.3 DIFFRACTION
wavefront
The bending of waves around corners of an obstacle is called
diffraction. When waves pass through an aperture or opening it
ray
spreads out due to diffraction.
We can observe the phenomenon of diffraction in a ripple tank
Obstacle
by generating straight waves and place two obstacles in such a
(a) Narrow opening
way that the separation is comparable to the wavelength of the
waves generated in the ripple tank. Waves, after passing
wavefront
through the narrow opening, spread out in every direction and
turn into circular waves. This effect is greatest when the size of
ray
the opening is less than or equal to the size of the wavelength of
generated waves as shown in figure 12.16 (a).
It is, however, to be noted that wavelength (or speed) of the
Obstacle
wave is not affected by diffraction. If the separation is large
(b) Wide opening
between obstacles compared to the wavelength, it can be seen
FIGURE 12.16 Diffraction
that central part of the wave is not affected, only part of the
wave at the edges diffracts as shown in figure 12.16 (b).
www.taleem360.com
A. Wavelength and Diffraction: The wavelength is the distance
UV Light
IR Light
< 400 nm
> 800 nm
between consecutive crests (or troughs) of a wave.
• Shorter Wavelengths: Waves with shorter wavelengths
diffract less. If the wavelength is much smaller than the size
of the gap, the waves will primarily travel straight through
with minimal spreading.
B₁-B₃
• Longer Wavelengths: Waves with longer wavelengths
diffract more. This means that if the wavelength is large
compared to the size of the gap, the waves will spread out
significantly after passing through the gap.
FIGURE 12.17 Wavelength
and diffraction
UV light, which has a shorter wavelength, diffracts less than IR
light, which has a longer wavelength, as shown in figure 12.17.
National Book Foundation
87
UNIT 12
WAVES
B. Gap Size and Diffraction: The size of the opening through which the waves pass.
• Narrow Gaps: When the gap size is comparable to or smaller than the wavelength of the wave,
significant diffraction occurs. The waves spread out widely on the other side of the gap.
• Wide Gaps: When the gap size is much larger than the wavelength, diffraction is minimal. The
waves pass through the gap with only slight spreading, and most of the wave energy remains in
the original direction of propagation.
For example sound waves have relatively large wavelength that is why they can diffract around
obstacles and through openings, allowing you to hear sounds even when you can't see the source.
Whereas light wave has much shorter wavelength, visible light has a wavelength range from about
400 nm to 700 nm. When light passes through a slit or an aperture that is much larger than its
wavelength, there is minimal diffraction, and the light beam remains well-defined. However, if
the slit is on the order of the light's wavelength (as in a diffraction grating), significant diffraction
and interference patterns can be observed.
www.taleem360.com
12.9 TSUNAMIS
A tsunami is a series of large ocean waves created by
underwater disturbances. These waves travel quickly
across the ocean and can reach great heights when they
approach the shore, causing massive flooding and
damage to coastal areas as shown in figure 12.17.
FIGURE 12.18 Tsunami destruction
12.9.1 TSUNAMI GENERATION
Tsunamis are most commonly caused by underwater
Wave
earthquakes, especially those that happen at tectonic
plate boundaries where one plate is pushed beneath
another. This sudden movement of the ocean floor
displaces a large amount of water, resulting in powerful
Epicenter of
earthquake
waves that travel across the ocean as shown in figure
Tsunami hits
12.18. Tsunamis can also be triggered by underwater
the coast
volcanic eruptions, as the explosion displaces water and
creates waves that spread outward. Additionally,
landslides occurring under the ocean can displace water
Tsunami start during earth
quake and giant waves travel
across the sea
and generate tsunamis. The movement of sediment and
rock on the seafloor causes water displacement, leading
to the formation of tsunamis. Although rare, large
meteorites impacting the ocean can also cause massive
waves due to the significant displacement of water.
FIGURE 12.19 Tsunami generation
National Book Foundation
88
WAVES
UNIT 12
12.9.2 CHARACTERISTICS OF TSUNAMIS
Tsunami waves move quickly across the ocean after the initial
DO YOU KNOW?
Lituya Bay, Alaska, July 9, 1958 A
notable exception was the 1958
tsunami triggered by a landslide in
a narrow bay on Alaska's coast. Its
over 1,700-foot wave was the
largest ever recorded for a tsunami.
disturbance, often traveling at speeds of 500-800 km/h (310-
500 mph). In deep waters, the waves are not very high,
making them hard to spot. However, as they near the coast,
their speed slows down while their height increases
significantly as the wave energy gets compressed.
When tsunamis hit land, they can cause massive destruction with their towering height and
powerful energy, flooding coastal regions, demolishing structures, and resulting in substantial
loss of life and property.
www.taleem360.com
SUMMARY
• Wave is the energy transfer mechanism without the transport of material media.
• Mechanical Waves are the waves that require medium for their propagation.
• Electromagnetic waves are the waves that do not require any media for their propagation.
• Transverse waves are the waves in which particles of the medium vibrate/oscillate
perpendicular to the direction of motion of waves.
• Longitudinal waves are the waves in which particles of the medium vibrate/oscillate
parallel to the direction of motion of waves.
• Seismic waves are caused by the sudden movement of materials within the Earth, such as
slip along a fault during an earthquake.
• Reflection is the throwing back by a body or surface of light, heat, or sound without
absorbing it.
• Refraction is the change in direction of a wave passing from one medium to another caused
by its change in speed.
• Diffraction is the bending of waves around the edges of an obstacle.
• Tsunamis are a series of enormous ocean waves caused by earthquakes, underwater
landslides, volcanic eruptions or asteroids.
National Book Foundation
89
UNIT 12
EXERCISE
MULTIPLE CHOICE QUESTIONS
QI. Choose the best possible option in the following questions.
1. If a body performing simple harmonic motion completes its one vibration in 2 seconds, its
frequency of vibration is:
A. 2 Hz
B. 1 Hz
C. 0.5 Hz
D. 10 Hz
2. 360 waves are passing through a point in a river in one hour, time period of the wave is:
A. 0.1 s
B. 1 s
C. 10 s
D. 100 s
www.taleem360.com
3. Time period of electrical vibrator of ripple tank is 0.5 s, water waves in ripple tank has
speed of 10 m/s and amplitude of 5 cm. Calculate the frequency of the waves.
A. 50 Hz
B. 0.5 Hz
C. 200 Hz
D. 2 Hz
4. Which of the followings is longitudinal wave?
A. X-rays
B. Light
C. String waves
D. Sound
5. When water waves enter from deep water to shallow water:
A. Frequency of water waves increases B. Time period of water waves decreases
C. Speed of water waves decreases D. Wavelength of water waves increases
6. Listening to radio transmission in deep valleys of mountain areas is due to:
A. Reflection of waves
B. Refraction of waves
C. Interference of waves
D. Diffraction of waves
7. Which of the following are transverse waves:
A. X-rays
B. Light
C. String waves
D. All of these
8. Tsunamis are most often generated by
A. Flood
B. Bomb blast
C. Earth quake
D. None of these
9. Waves transfer:
A. energy
B. frequency
C. wavelength
D. velocity
10. Which of the following characteristics of a wave is independent of the others?
A. speed
B. frequency
C. amplitude
D. wavelength
11. The relation between v, f and λ of a wave is:
A. Vf=λ
B. fλ=v
C. vλ=f
D. v=λ/f
National Book Foundation
90
WAVES
UNIT 12
CONSTRUCTED RESPONSE QUESTIONS
QII. Follow the directions to respond to the following questions.
1. (a) In the graph below represent crest, trough and origin. (b) Also in similar graph drawn
again show displacement, amplitude and wavelength.
a
b
www.taleem360.com
SHORT RESPONSE QUESTIONS
QIII. Give a short response to the following questions.
1. What will happen to frequency of waves in a ripple tank if time period of electrical vibrator
is decreased? What will happen to speed of waves?
2. What will happen to wavelength, speed, frequency and time period of the water waves in
ripple tank if water waves enter from deep water to shallow water regions?
3. Nuclear fusion explosions are taking place at Sun, we get heat on earth but do not hear
sound. Why?
4. Why do water waves refract at the boundary of shallow water and deep water? Relate this
behavior to refraction of light.
5. Classify different wave types based on whether they require a medium for propagation.
Justify why electromagnetic waves do not need a medium.
6. Under what conditions maximum diffraction of waves occurs?
7. Distinguish between reflection and refraction by describing how each process affects wave
direction and speed. Design an experiment to demonstrate both phenomena using a ripple
tank, and evaluate how changes in medium affect each process.
LONG RESPONSE QUESTIONS
QIV. Give a detailed response to the following questions.
1. How does a wave transfer energy without transferring matter? How does this principle
apply to different media like ropes, water, and air?
91
National Book Foundation
UNIT 12
WAVES
2. Describe the key characteristics of a wave (wavelength, frequency, amplitude) and their
relationships to each other. How do these characteristics affect the wave's energy and
behavior?
3. Explain the relationship between wave speed, frequency, and wavelength using the
equation v = fλ. Analyze a scenario where one of these variables changes and discuss the
impact on the others.
4. Compare and contrast transverse and longitudinal waves, providing examples of each. Why
is this distinction important in understanding wave behavior?
5. Describe how waves undergo reflection, refraction, and diffraction. Analyze a real-world
scenario to illustrate these phenomena.
6. How does the wavelength of a wave affect its diffraction pattern? What factors determine
the extent of diffraction, and how can this principle be applied in technology?
7. Explain the formation of tsunamis due to underwater earthquakes. Discuss how these
waves change as they move from deep to shallow water and their potential impacts.
8. How does the amplitude of a wave relate to the amount of energy it carries? Use
mathematical reasoning and real-world examples to support your answer.
9. Differentiate between primary (P) and secondary (S) seismic waves. How do these waves
provide insights into the Earth's internal structure?
10. Discuss practical applications of wave reflection, refraction, and diffraction in technology.
Provide examples and analyze their significance.
www.taleem360.com
NUMERICAL RESPONSE QUESTIONS
QV. Solve the questions given below.
1. If 10 waves are produced on a long-stretched string of length 20 m. What is wavelength of
the waves? What will be frequency of the wave if speed of waves is 12 ms´¹. (Ans. 2 m, 6 Hz)
2. In a ripple tank 1.5 m, waves cover this length in 2 seconds. If distance between
two successive crest and trough is 10 cm then find the number of waves, frequency of waves
and their time period?
(Ans. 7.5 waves, 3.75 Hz, 0.266 s)
3. Calculate the frequency of red light wavelength 700 nm in vacuum? (Ans. 4.29 × 10¹4 Hz)
4. A wooden bar vibrating into the water surface in a ripple tank has a frequency of 12 Hz.
The resulting wave has a wavelength of 3 cm. What is the speed of the wave?
(Ans. 0.36 m s´¹)
5. What is the wavelength of the radio-waves transmitted by an FM station at 90 Mhz?
(Ans. 3.33 m)
National Book Foundation
92
Unit
13
SOUND
What is the typical
material used to make
drumheads?
www.taleem360.com
STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES
The students will:
✓ [SLO: P-10-D-12] Describe the production of sound.
✓ [SLO: P-10-D-13] Describe the longitudinal nature of sound waves.
✓ [SLO: P-10-D-14] State the approximate range of frequencies audible to humans as 20Hz to 20000Hz.
✓ [SLO: P-10-D-15] Justify why sound waves cannot travel in a vacuum.
✓ [SLO: P-10-D-16] Describe how changes in amplitude and frequency affect the loudness and pitch of sound
waves.
✓ [SLO: P-10-D-17] Describe how different sound sources produce sound waves with different timbres.
✓ [SLO: P-10-D-18] Describe an echo as the reflection of sound waves.
✓ [SLO: P-10-D-19] Justify simple experiments to show the reflection of sound waves.
✓ [SLO: P-10-D-20] Illustrate a method involving a measurement of distance and time for determining the
speed of sound in air.
✓ [SLO: P-10-D-21] State that the speed of sound in air is approximately 330 - 350m/s.
✓ [SLO: P-10-D-22] Describe that, in general, sound travels faster in solids than in liquids and faster in liquids
than in gasses.
✓ [SLO: P-10-D-23] Define ultrasound as sound with a frequency higher than 20 kHz.
✓ [SLO: P-10-D-24] Illustrate and analyze the uses of Ultrasound [in cleaning, prenatal and other medical
scanning, and in sonar.
✓ [SLO: P-10-D-25] Illustrate the use of infrasound.
✓ [SLO: P-10-D-26] Analyze the effects of noise pollution on the environment.
UNIT 13
SOUND
✓ [SLO: P-10-D-27] Justify the importance of acoustic protection.
✓ [SLO: P-10-D-28] Describe how knowledge of the properties of sound waves is applied in the design of
buildings with respect to acoustics.
✓ [SLO: P-10-D-29] Explain the use of soft materials to reduce echo sounding.
✓ [SLO: P-10-D-30] Explain, with examples, how sound can reflect, refract and diffract.
✓ [SLO: P-10-D-31] Explain how sound is converted by the eardrum and nerves into electrical signals that are
then interpreted by the brain.
Sound is a mechanical wave that originates from the
vibration of particles in a medium such as air, water,
or solids. These vibrations create longitudinal waves,
where particles oscillate parallel to the direction of
wave propagation, causing regions of compression
and rarefaction. The properties of sound waves,
including frequency, amplitude, and speed,
determine the characteristics of the sound, such as
pitch and loudness. Sound waves require a medium
to travel, and their behavior can be influenced by FIGURE 13.1 Sound Devices
reflection, refraction, diffraction, and interference.
www.taleem360.com
Sound is essential for communication, entertainment, and various technological applications,
making its study important in diverse fields.
13.1 SOURCE OF SOUND
That object which is basically the cause of vibration is called Source of Sound. For Example;
Our clapping hands, chirping birds, Musical Instruments etc. as shown in figure 13.2.
Clapping hands
Bird Chirping
Thunder
Ringing cellphone
Musical instruments school bell
foot steps
car horn
FIGURE 13.2 Sources of Sound
National Book Foundation
94
SOUND
UNIT 13
POINT TO
PONDER
A stethoscope works by transmitting sound from
the chest-piece to the listener's ears through air-
filled hollow tubes. The chest-piece typically has
a plastic disc known as the diaphragm. The
diaphragm picks up vibrations from physiological
noises.
These vibrations create acoustic pressure waves, which travel up the
tubing to the listener's ears after multiple reflections.
13.1.1 HOW SOUND IS PRODUCED?
Production of sound totally depends upon vibration of object. Vibrating source transforms energy,
due to vibration and it compels to the surrounding medium to vibrate through which sound wave
travels. The surrounding medium particles obey to and fro motion. Basically sound waves are such
waves which produce sensation of listening when strike with ear drum. Production of pressure
waves are the main cause of vibration, later on it collides with our auditory system resultantly we
are able to listen sound. Sounds surround us from machines and vehicles to birds and
conversations. Experiments show that vibrations are essential for sound production, such as:
blowing across a bottle, Plucking a stretched rubber band, flapping cardboard or bird wings and
striking a bell or drumhead.
www.taleem360.com
Let's perform a very simple and short duration
experiment to show the vibration is necessary for
Vibrating
tuning
fork
production of sound. Few things are required in this
experiment like Tuning fork, rubber pad, Glass and
water only. First of all take glass which is filled with
Glass
Water
full of water. Secondly hit tuning fork on rubber pad
and touch one prong of vibrating tuning fork very
gently with surface of water as shown in figure
13.3(a). In third step, vibrating tuning fork will be
dipped vertically into glass of water as shown in
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 13.3 Production of sound
figure 13.3 (b).
In both of the above positions of vibrating tuning fork, sound can be observed due to vibration of
tuning fork with particles of medium (water molecules). This experiment can be performed with
empty glass and sound of vibration of tuning fork can also be heard, but in both cases sound
impact will be different because in empty glass air exists so sound impact is smaller as compare to
presence of water.
National Book Foundation
95
UNIT 13
SOUND
INFORMATION
Bats can hear frequencies up to 120,000 Hz. Other animals cannot hear such high-pitched sounds. Mice
can hear frequencies up to 100,000 Hz, dogs up to 35,000 Hz, and cats up to 25,000 Hz. Humans hear
sounds only upto about 20,000 Hz, but children can usually hear higher-frequency sounds than adults
13.1.2 MEDIUM FOR PROPAGATION OF SOUND
As we know that sound waves are mechanical longitudinal in nature so for propagation of sound
waves from one point to another point medium is required. Without the existence of medium
these waves may be produced by vibrating objects but cannot travel from one place to another
place. For example; in class room if air does not exist, students will be able to listen all lecture
points are delivered by teacher. Let's discuss a very simple experiment for understanding the
importance of medium for propagation of sound waves.
Let's take an electric bell and an airtight glass bell jar. The
electric bell is suspended inside the airtight bell jar. The bell
jar is connected to a vacuum pump, as shown in figure13.4.
If you press the switch you will be able to hear the bell. Now
start the vacuum pump. When the air in the jar is pumped
out gradually, the sound becomes fainter, although the same
current is passing through the bell. After some time when
less air is left inside